
                          WORKS ISSUED BY

                        The Hakluyt Society.

                               ------

                               DIARY

                                 OF

                           RICHARD COCKS.




                FIRST SERIES. NO. LXVII-MDCCCXXXIII




                               DIARY

                                 OF

                           RICHARD COCKS


           CAPE-MERCHANT IN THE ENGLISH FACTORY IN JAPAN

                             1615-1622

                       _WITH CORRESPONDENCE_




                             EDITED BY

                       EDWARD MAUNDE THOMPSON




                              VOL. II




                      BURT FRANKLIN, PUBLISHER
                         NEW YORK, NEW YORK




                            Published by
                           BURT FRANKLIN
                       514 West 113th Street
                         New York 25, N. Y.




            ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED BY THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY
                      REPRINTED BY PERMISSION




                       PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




                      DIARY OF RICHARD COCKS.                               1


                               1618.


_January 1._--I delivered these bills to Mr. Osterwick this day,
viz.:--

  1 bill Kyng Firandos, Figen a Came, for                3000 _tais_.
  1 bill Unagenses, for 1/2 barill gunpolder             0010: 0: 0
  1 bill Unagenses, for 8 pec. dutts 8 R. _corg._
    sould for 1 _tay_ pec., is                           0008: 0: 0
  1 bill Kitskin Donos, for money lent hym               0020: 0: 0
  1 bill of Guarian Ushenusque Dono, mony lent           0020: 0: 0
  1 bill of Guenchque or Tonomon Same, kinges brother    0050: 0: 0
  1 bill ditto Tonomon Same, for 8 pec. red zelas        0008: 0: 0

And I gave hym my writing for my boy Tushma, called Bicho, bought of
Jno. Japon.

We had much adoe with the mareners of our junk about carrying
passingers along with them, and som of the officers of junk came
ashore, but I sent them back per kinges order.

And about midnight I went abord the junck to Cochy my selfe, and carid
20 loves bread, a veneson pastie, a peece rosting beefe, and a bottell
Spanish wyne; and in the way met an offecer of the junk, called
Tiquan, and caryed hym back againe. Mr. Eaton had much ado abord,
before I came, and turned 9 passingers ashore whom he fownd hid in
mareners cabbins.

Capt. Adames rec. 900 _tais_ plate bars in parte of payment for his         2
junk.

And I had these newyears giftes following geven me:--

  A barill _morofack_ from Capt. Adames.
  A _maky_ contor from Mr. Ric. Wickham.
  A compas for variation from Mr. Wedmore.
  A band and a nightcap from Jno. Cook.
  A peece black taffety from Capt. China.

And I gave these newyears giftes following, viz.:--

  To Capt. Adames a nest of 5 _maky_ beakers.
  To Mr. Wickham a _wakadash_ and knife geven me per Safian Dono or
    Chubio Dono.
  To Mr. Wedmor 2 _maky_ beakers.
  To Jno. Cook a pere silk stockinges, ash culler.

_January 2._--Oure junk _Sea Adventure_ put to sea this mornyng betyme
from Cochy.

I rec. the writing of my boy Lawrance from Mr. Eaton. He cost me 20
_tais_ Japon plate.

I delivered one hundred _tais_ plate bars to Mr. Nealson, proceed of
thinges of his sould per Ric. King at Miaco. And ther was a bar plate,
containing 4_ta._ 3_m._ 3_co._, geven to the botswains wife of our
junk which is gon to Syam, per a generall consent, she coming to se
her husband.

_January 3._--The ould man of Langasaque being desirous to retorne,
although he were sick, Mr. Osterwick paid hym 1-1/2 _tais_ plate for
his payns coming from Langasaque, buying and setteing the 8 trees.

And we rec. of the _Tono_ of Firando one thousand _taies_ plate bars
in parte payment of his bill of 3000 _tais_, and 1000 _tais_ more was
paid before in rise and money and tymber. So now restes 1000 _tais_ to
be paid upon that bill. This 1000 _tais_ Mr. Osterwick receved, and
paid it instantly to Andrea Dittis, China Capt., yt being lent to hym
and his brother Whaw gratis for a yeare, without intrest, to be
emploid about procuring trade into China.

Groby Dono ment to play the villen, and thought to have brought me in       3
danger for sale of 30 _pico_ silk unto hym, having made a falce
writing, as Capt. Adames, Mr. Wickham, our _jurebasso_, and others can
witnesse; and procured Takamon Dono (our enymie) to bring the matter
in question, he being cheefe justice in the kingdom of Firando. And so
he sent 3 men unto me in the name of Groby Dono to demand performance
of sale of 30 _picull_ of silk. But I took such a course that my bad
writing proved good, and served hym as he served me, yet nothing but
the truth.

The King of Firando sent unto me to make an end of the processe I have
with Cazanseque, scrivano of Giquans junk, which Mr. Sayer cam in from
Syam.

_January 4._--I began a plito (or processe) this day against
Cazanseque, the scrivano of Giquans junk, and Goresano, our quandom
_jurebasso_, the coppie wherof, in Japons, I keepe in my hand, and
sent the princepall to King of Firando per Mr. Sayer and Jno.
_jurebasso_.

We cleared yisterday with King Firando for his bill of 3000 _tais_,
wherof he paid 1000 _tais_ in money, 1000 in tymber and rise, and this
day gave me a bill for the other 1000 _tais_ to be paid within 3
monthes.

_January 5._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Whaw to Langasaque how I had
paid the 1000 _taies_ to his brother, Andrea Dittis, tuching our
busynes (or entrance) into China, and that my selfe and what else was
in my power, was at his comand. Also that I hoped our shipp would be
ready to departe towardes Bantam within few dayes, and was ready to
serve hym in what I could, and ment to com to vizet hym at Langasaque
within few daies, being very sory for the death of his yong sonne,
etc.

_January 6._--Semi Dono made a new junk, and the mareners danced about
towne with 3 whores in their company at Semi Donos apointment, I not
having seene the lyke till now.

_January 7._--Capt. Adames being at supper at our howse, and going          4
hom, met Toncha Samas wife going hom, and on of her slaves strock the
lanterne out of Capt. Adames mans hand.

_January 8._--I went and advised Oyen Dono how Capt. Adams was abuced
yisternight, I being an eye wittnes. He tould me I was best to enforme
Torasemon Dono of the matter, and Semi Dono, yf I thought best, whoe
would take order the fello should be punished.

Niquan came from Langasaque to accord with Capt. Adames to goe pilot
for Cochinchina.

_January 9._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames expreesse, at request of
China Capt., to will hym to goe with the Chinas rather then the
Japons, in respect the Honorable Comp. adventure with Ed. Sayer goeth
in her, and they offer to geve hym more then any other.

The Hollandes shipp, called the _Galleas_, put to sea from Cochy 4
daies past, hearing that the Amacau shipp was falne downe and thought
to seale away before they were aware.

_January 10._--We had news this day that the Amacou shipp put to sea 4
daies past and of purpose to fight with the Holland _Gallias_, but I
am of opinion, yf they meete, that the Amacau ship will goe for Bantam
or Molucos.

_January 11._--News came from Langasaque that the Amacau ship put back
to Langasaque per meanes of contrary wyndes, but sowne after put out
to sea againe.

_January 12._--I rec. a letter from Capt. Adames, dated in Langasaque
2 daies past, in answer of myne sent hym per expres the 9th currant,
and that he meaneth to retorne to Firando within 2 or 3 daies, and end
with the Chinas.

The fownders, or mynt men, came againe to melt plate this day.

This day newes came that the Amacau ship is retorned to Facunda, 3
leagues from Langasaque, and have sent a pinisse (or barke) to Goto,        5
to look out for Hollandes shipp, being afeard to put to sea, yf she be
out.

_January 13._--We had much adowe in fending and provinge betwixt the
chirurgion of th' _Adviz_ and Ric. Wedmor, the master his mate, the
chirurgion saying that Wedmor had broken open his chist and taken out
2 bottell of oyle or medsonable stuffe; but the other denid it. Yet
there was witnes he took them out, but put them in againe. The truth
is, the chirurgion is a fowle mouthed fello and on that is two much
geven to drinking; and, on the other syid, Wedmor is a pivish
overwyneing fello.

Going about to melt plate in _somo_, we found it would stand us in
about 23 per cento losse in Japon plate bars. So we gave it over, and
melted but 500 _tais_ in _fibuk_ or first melting, to send to Bantam
for a triall. In which plate we lost 14-1/2 in som, 15-1/2 in other,
and in som more.

_January 14._--The Hollanders broght the junk ashore which they took
from the Chinas and will trym her on a sudden (as they say) to send
for Cochinchina.

Capt. Adames retorned from Langasaque, haveing byn 4 daies on the way
per meanes fowle wether and contrary windes. He sayeth the pilot of
the Amacou shipp tould hym they had sight of the Hollandes shipp,
which made them to retorne back into Langasaque roade for feare she
would have set upon her.

The China Capt. desyrd to have our _fro_ heated for hym and other
Chinas; which was donne.

_January 15._--Taffy Dono sent us 2 pine trees to set at our dore on
the new years day of Japon, being _Shonguach_, which begyneth on
Sattarday next, being the 17th currant.

_January 16._--Mr. Nealson in his fustion fumes did beate Co Jno., our
_jurebasso_, about the head with his shewes in the streete, because he
came not to hym at his first calle, and yet had a _jurebasso_ of his
owne as good a linguist as he. This man still seeketh quarrells
against all men, which is no small trowble and greefe unto me, I            6
having much adoe to please all and yet cannot.

I gave a bar plate containing 2_ta._ 9_m._ 0_co._ to the _maky_ man in
respect he gave me a banketing box.

We gave Taffi Dono a present of 1-1/2 _tatt._ black bayes and 2
_tatta_ fustion, and the oyleman 1-1/2 _tatt._ blak bayes: they being
our money changers.

_January 17_ (_Shonguach 1_).--I sent the China Capt. a present of a
_keremon_, a bottell Spanish wyne, and a banketing box Portingall
fartes[1], diet bread, and other sweet meates; and to Niquan the
China, his kynsman, a _keremon_; and to Matingas father a _kerremon_;
and to the women 3 boxes of Portingall fartes, etc.; and to China
Capt. doughter a _keremon_, she coming to vizet me and brought a peece
damaske.

And many Chinas came to vizet me in a troope together, wishing me a
good new yeare. And Tonomon Sama, the kinges brother, passing by, sent
his man in his behalfe to wish me a good new yeare, exskewsing his not
entring, he being going to his mother.

     [1] _Farte_, a tart.

_January 18._--Ther was presentes sent as followeth, viz.:--To the
king or _tono_ 2 _barsos_ wyne and 2 fyshes; to Tonomon Sama, his
brother, the lyke; to Bongo Sama, his uncle, the lyke; to Sangero Sama
2 barilles wyne and 1 fysh; to Semy Dono, the lyke; to Oyen Dono, the
lyke; to Taccamon Dono, the lyke; to Sugeon Dono, the lyke; to his
father, the lyke; to Torazemon Dono, the lyke.

And I went and viseted Capt. Adames and his host and carid hym and
thother a bottell Spanish wine and a banketing box sweet meates, with
2 little bottells _morofack_.

_January 19._--We gave the mint man a _tattamy_ and a halfe of bayes
for a present, and paid him for melting plate, viz.: for _fibuk_, or
once melted, 5 _mas_ per c. _tais_; for bars twise melted, one per
cento; they to find coles and we lead; as the Hollanders did the like;      7
and yf we melt plate _somo_, to pay 1-1/2 per cento.

The oyle man, our money changer, brought a present of 10 bundelles
money paper and a baskit of mustard seed. And the founders brought a
bundell Japon writing paper containing 5 quire. We sent a present of 2
_barsos_ wyne and fyshes to Unagense Dono, and Sugien Donos father
came to English howse and brought a present of _muchos_, wyne, and
fysh to me, and the like to Mr. Wickham.

_January 20._--Oyen Dono came to vizet me and brought me 5 fans for a
present, wishing us a good new yeare.

And after dyner Torazemon Dono sent me word that Capt. Speck ment to
vizet the kyng to wish hym a good new yeare, and gave me councell to
doe the lyke, this day being held a happie day, and taken in kynd
parte by them which were vizeted. So I went and carid a jar of
conservs, not to goe emptie handed. And sowne after came Capt. Speck
with a cheane of gould about his neck, being accompanid with Capt.
Barkhout, Mr. Albartus, and Leonard. And I had Mr. Nealson and Mr.
Osterwick with me. And I think there were above 1000 Japons at same
tyme to vizet the king. I thought at first they would have called in
Capt. Speck before me, which yf they had, I would have retorned home
without seeing the king. But in the end I was called in and my present
of 2 _barsos_ wyne, 2 fyshes, and jar conservs present, for which
the king gave me thankes with many complementall wordes that he held
my visetation that day in much esteem, and so drank to me and to the
rest. And, at our going out, Capt. Speck entred, his present being a
barrill wyne and fysh, with a long table or present bord, filled with
trenchars, _gocos_, and tobacco boxes, China _maky_ ware.

The China Capt. sent to borrow a jar conserves of me, which I sent
unto hym; and his littell doughter came and brought me a present of 2
_maky_ standing cups and covers, her father being present. The kinges       8
brother, Bongo Same, Semi Dono, and Torazemon Dono thanked me for the
presentes sent them; but Unagense saw me, not speaking to me.

Also Yasimon Dono and the smith came to vizet me, and brought each on
a bundell paper and a fan; as divers neighbors brought fans, _nifon
cantange_.

_January 21._--We sent presentes this day:--To Gonoske Dono, 2
_barsos_ wyne and fysh; and to Nobeske Dono the like. The scholmaster
brought a basket oranges for present.

News came from Langasaque how the Amacau shipp riding at an ancor at
Faconde, a league from thence, som caffros or slaves of the Spaniardes
or Portugezes went ashore in the night and stole a cow, having kilde
her; but before they could get her into their boate, the owner pursued
them with other cuntrey people and laid hould on them. But the
Spaniardes or Portingalles came to sucker them, and soe they fell from
wordes to blowes, the Portingall etc. killing 2 or 3 Japons. Whereupon
the King of Umbra sent downe soldiers to take the offenders and would
have forced the shipp, except they had deliverd the princepall
offenders into his handes, which he caused to be cut in peeces, so
many of them as they had kild of Japons.

_January 22._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Whaw per Niquan, and sent him
2000 _tais_ plate bars to melt into plate _somo_ per Emperours
rendadors.

Unagense Dono sent me a present of 2 littell _barsos_ wyne, 2 fyshes,
a phasant cock, 2 Japon cakes or _muchos_, and certen rootes. And 2
Chinas brought a present of sweetmeates, called by the Japons _ye by
god_, made of barley flower, suger, and other matters.

_January 23._--The herb woman brought a small _barso_ wyne and 1
string cuttelfish for a present.

_January 24._--I rec. a letter from Jor. Durois, dated in Langasaque,       9
1th February, new stile, wherin he advised me that a Laskero, or More,
which was a slave in the Amacan shipp, had stolne a beefe ashore at
Faconda, the which coming to the capt. eares, and that there was a man
slaine about it, he caused the Lascaro to be carid ashore, and hanged.
This he sayeth was the brute which hapened at Facondo, of which I took
notis before.

I made up the _maky_ ware for my Lady Smith this day, for her
contor rec. in the _Adviz_, rated at 40 mark str., is 106: 6: 7:
and packed it up in 5 parcelles in chistes, viz.:

                                                             _ta._ _m._ _co._
  No. 1, containing 3 nestes trunkes, cost                    24    0     0
  No. 2, containing 1 case bottelles, cost                    10    0     0
  No. 3, containing 3 scritorios, cost                        24    0     0
  No. 4, 1 greate scritorio, cost                             12    5     0
  No. 5, divers matters, viz.:--                              36    1     7
                                              _ta._ _m._ _co._
    01 scritorio, cost                         05    0    0
    03 basons and spout pots, greate           10    5    0
    03 ditto lesser sort, cost                 07    5    0
    02 standing cups, cost                     02    6    0
    02 tankardes, cost                         01    6    0
    20 beakers, cost                           06    0    0
    For 5 chistes silk watta, cotton woll,
      ropes and mattes to pack them in         02    9    7
                                                            ---------------
  Som totall cost                                            106    6     7

Which I sent in the _Adviz_ for Bantam, consigned to Capt. George
Bale, to send it for England per first conveance. Mr. David Watkins,
Sir Tho. Smiths man, wrot 2 letters in my Lady Smiths name, to have
the contor, or scritorio, sould, and retorne made in such matters as
the Company did not deale in; and Mr. Bale advised it to be in
_maky_ ware.

_January 25._--The Chinas at night came to our English howse, and
made fyreworkes.

_January 26._--I gave Andrea Dittis, China Capt., 4 letters
testimoniall or of favor, directed to all English ships at sea or          10
others, frendes to his Matie of England, on for a junk bound to
Tonkyn at Cochinchina, and the other 3 for 3 junkes bound Island
Formosa, called Taccasanga or Piscadores.

Skiamon Dono brought a present of a bundell paper and a fan.

_January 27._--Skidayen Dono set the mastes of his junk this day, and
made a feast, _nifon catange_; and I sent hym a banketing box,
sweetmeates, and 2 bottelles _singe_.

Groby Dono came, accompanid with Yasimon Dono, Capt. Adames host, and
an other merchant of Sackay, to make frenship with me before he went
back; and offred to deliver me back my bill of sale of silk to Croby
Dono, and to rec. in his delivered to me with the 1000 _tais_ I had in
hand, and with all desird a letter to Croby Dono of what past for his
owne discharge. I demanded (or desird) of hym to let me have the 1000
_taies_ which I had in my handes, and to receave the like som of
Tozemon Dono of Sakay; of the which they said they would bethink them
selves, and soe departed.

_January 28._--Certen Chinas came to vizet me after daylight, and
brought fireworkes, which shewed well per night.

_January 29._--The China Capt. had letters from Langasaque that they
were content to parte the _tiquan_[2] office of tow, to let Capt.
Adames men have the one halfe to send one or 2 in it, as he would, and
for marreners to send 3 or 4, yf he would.

The governor of Langasaque, in the abcense of Gonrok Dono, passed by
this place, and sent me a letter his brother had wrot unto me,
complementall, for using him kyndly as he passed this way the last
yeare. This man is bound to the Emperours court, haveing a processe
against Tuan Dono, the rich (as they terme hym), of Langasaque, whome
this man hath gotten a sentance against, and utterly undon Tuan. This      11
man brought me a _chaw_ cup covered with silver for a present, being
worth som 3 _tais_. And in his company came a servant of Safian Dono,
and an other of Chubio Dono; and the first brought me a _barso_ of
wine.

Skidayen Dono and his consortes had the feast of Baccus for their junk
this day, dansing thorow the streetes with _caboques_, or women
players, and entred into our English howse in that order, most of
their heades being hevier than their heeles, that they could not find
way hom without leading.

     [2] Chinese: _ti-kwan_, local office.

_January 30._--This day ended the Japon feast of 15, and they took
downe the trees sett up first day, and fet their faggotes with rise
and wyne, as yearly they doe on this day.

Ushenusque Dono sent me a phaisant cock, exskewsing his not coming per
meanes of his emploimentes abroad. And I sent the governor Langasaque
and Safian Donos man, eache of them, a quart bottell strong waters,
with eache of them a China cup to drink it in. Also Figen a Came, Kyng
of Firando, sent me 2 _barsos_ wyne and a wild boare for a present,
wishing me a prosperous new yeare. And Ike Dono, the cavelero of
Xaxma, came and vizeted me, with a present of 3 bundelles or reames
Japon paper, he being lately retorned from Xaxma, where he sayeth the
king is much affectioned to our English nation.

_January 31._--Groby Dono wrot a letter to Capt. Adames to Cochy
in bad termes, that I went about to deceave hym, and would force hym
to take 150 _tais_ in bad Nishew counterfet plate. Unto which I
retornd answer that all he said was falce, and that I offerd hym no
money but the same I receved from hym. This fello is he which would
have cozend me with a falce writing, to have brought me in domages for
2000 _tais_ for sale of 30 _pico_ silk upon delivery, contrary to my
trew meanyng, as Capt. Adames, Mr. Wickham, our _jurebasso_, and 3
other Japons are witnesse.

_February 1._--Capt. Adames fell into extreme termes this day about        12
Groby Dono, he which falcefied the writing, taking his part against me
and all the English. I never saw hym in the lyke humour. We paid this
Groby Dono the 1000 _tais_ spoken of before, and receved in my bill of
Croby Dono for sale silke in question before, and deliverd hym in his
bill of Croby Donos geven to me.

_February 2._--Mr. Nealson said he had certen monies taken out of his
scritorio, the theefe drawing the neales out of 2 boxes, he laying it
to the charge of Mr. Wickhams servant, whome he newly entertayned, Mr.
Nealson haveing put hym away. But Mr. Wickham held it done of mallice
rather then a truth.

_February 3._--The China Capt. went to Langasaque, and Capt. Adames
tould hym before he went that he would be as good as his word and goe
on the voyage to Cochinchina.

_February 4._--I rec. a letter from botswain of our junk _Sea
Adventure_, dated at Tomare[3] in Xaxma 23 dais past: how they put in
theare the 5th day after they went from hence, per meanes W.erly
wyndes and hie sea, and ment to put to sea som 16 daies past.

The Japon slave I saved from the gallous, and gave to Mr. Wickham, ran
away, and, sending after hym, was fownd in a horehouse with 2 or 3
_tais_ plate in his purse, parte wherof he had spent amongst those
leawd people, and the reste delivered to a Japon to keepe. He
confeseth that he had sould certen buttons (as he cald them) to a
Japon for 1-1/2 _mas_, they being som 50 in nomber, which he sayeth he
stole from Mr. Wickham; which (as he sayeth) were littell corall
beades and som pearle, which he now misseth, looking for them.

     [3] Tomari, on the coast.

_February 5._--The China which went to Edo to get out _goshons_, or
pasports, retorned to Firando this day, telling me he staid 42 daies       13
at Edo before he could have a dispach, and was 13 dais going from
Miaco to Edo, and as many in retorning, and 18 dais coming from Osakay
to Firando. He sayeth the sonne of Safian Dono is to succeade his
father as governor of Langasaque, and that Gonrok Dono, his cozen, is
to com to remeane at Langasaque as his deputy. This China brought me a
present of 2 _barsos_ wyne and a greate charger of chistnuttes, and
departed for Langasaque on such a sudden that he was gon before I sent
to thank hym, thinking to have sent hym a present.

_February 6._--The theevishe slave I gave to Mr. Wickham did accuse
his father, mother, and many others, to whome he said he delivered all
such matters as he had stolne; but they denid all. And he still
accused others; but no proofe.

_February 8._--Extreme cold wether.

Miguell, our ould _jurebasso_, envited Capt. Adames and me to
breckfast, being recovered of a great sicknesse, wherof our chirurgion
had healed hym when he was speechlesse and thought past cure; which he
did at my request.

_February 9._--Frost and snow.

Soyemon Dono sent to borow money of me, for that, as he sayeth, he is
shortly to goe to the Emperours cort with the _tono_ (or king) of
Firando his master, whoe (as he sayeth) is to marry themperours
kynswoman; but my answer was, I had noe money.

Also Semy Dono would borow the mast of a small junck we have, to make
a foremast for his new junck. I answerd hym, yf he would take junck
and mast together at price I paid for her, I was content, but to lend
the mast I could not, having occation to employ the junck.

_February 10._--A hard frost, the lyke I not having seene since I came
into Japon, it being above an inch thick, the ise frozen this last
night. Snow all day and parte of night following.

There was a howse broken open the night past and 15 or 20 Japon            14
_keremons_, or coates, stolne out. But the theefe was fownd, being a
carpenter, and put into prison.

_February 11._--Still cold frosty wether.

Sangero Samma and others still send to borow money, which maketh me
awery to live amongst them; for lend money I will not to such as I
know will never repay it.

_February 12._--Pasquall Benita came from Langasaque to Firando and
brought me a present of _coiebos_, _micanas_,[4] and peares. He tells
me the Amacan carick will not goe out this yeare for feare of the
Hollanders, and that the merchantes and capt. major goe to law about
it. The capt. would goe out, but the merchantes will not. I think this
fello came for an espie to se whether the Hollanders and we were ready
to goe out. He is an Italian borne.

     [4] _Mikan_, an orange.

_February 13._--I went to the king, accompanid with Capt. Adames,
Mr. Wickham, and Ed. Sayer, to tell hym our ship was ready to goe out
towardes Bantam, and Ed. Sayer for Cochinchina. Soe, yf he pleased to
comand my service to Bantam, England, or Cochinchina, we were ready to
doe it; for the which he thanked us. Also I demanded justice against
Cazanzeque and Goresano, the which he tould me he would doe me reason
in.

Jno. Yossen the Hollander came from Edo this day.

I went to Hollandes howse to vizet Capt. Speck. So I met Capt.
Barkhoot theare, whoe envited me and rest of English abord the _Son_
to dyner on Sonday next.

Jor. Durois wrot me there were speeches at Langasaque that Shongo
Samme themperour was dead; but I esteeme it a lye, Jno. Yooson coming
from Edo and saw hym; delivered thordinance to hym which the
Hollanders sent for a present.

_February 14._--A cavalero of Osakay sent me a present of a banketing
box, meate, _nifon catange_ (or Japon fation), with a _barso_ of
_singe_, because I made hym colation thother day; but I rather think it    15
a preparative to borow money; yet herein he may be deceaved, for I
fynd many borowers but non that make repayment.

_February 15._--We dyned abord the _Son_, where Capt. Barkhout used us
kyndly, and drunk healths to the Kinges Matie of England, and at every
cup a gun, rownd about table, being 11 or 12 persons, and was answered
the like out of the _Adviz_. And at our coming abord gave us 3 peeces
ordinance and 7 at our departure; and we had 5 out of the _Adviz_.
Capt. Speck came not at feast, as I thinke only of pride, dowbting
whether I should syt above him or no.

We had news that the junk _Sea Adventure_ was in Xaxma 13 daies
past, yet I have no letter from Mr. Eaton.

I gave the coxswayne and company Hollandes shipp, for fetching us
abord and seting ashore, ii R. of 8.

_February 17._--We sent 5 chistes money abord _Adviz_, all refyned
plate, containing 9063 _tais_, which with exchange is 10920: 7: 8-1/2.

_February 18._--The shipp _Adviz_ went out to Cochi roade this day and
shot affe 7 peeces for a fare well; and the Hollanders answerd with 3
from the _Son_ and 3 from the howse, and a Japon junk 3; and we replid
with 3 more; and at our departure from Cochi back the _Adviz_ gave us
7 peeces more.

There were som speeches passed betwixt Mr. Wickham and Mr. Totton, as
also betwixt Mr. Nealson and Mr. Totton, which were taken in ill parte
on thon parte and other. But in my opinion Mr. Totton was in the falt.
I did what I could to make frenship, and made it betwixt Mr. Wickham
and hym; but Mr. Nealson would not be frends upon no termes, although
Mr. Totton desird it and before all the company drunk a health to hym,
wishing it might never goe thorow hym yf he bare hym any mallice.

The Hollanders sent out their _foy fone_ to helpe to toe out our           16
shipp, rowed with 16 ores, and we set out 2 _foyfones_, dowbting
whether the Firandesas would send barkes to helpe us or no, because
they fealed in the junck. But they sent out 10 or 12 barkes, which had
byn enough, allthough we had no others.

_February 19._--The Hollandes shipp _Son_ went out to Cochy roade.
Went out our _foyfone_ with 18 owres to help to toe them out. The kyng
sent 2 of his _foyfones_ to helpe them out, besydes the towne boates.
I note downe he sent non to us yisterday.

I deliverd up my letter and acco. to Mr. Wickham to be sent for Bantam
and London.

_February 20._--Som two howers before day we went abord the _Adviz_ at
Cochy, and presently after Capt. Speck came abord, desyring us the
ship might stay an hower or two for hym to write a letter; which I
promised hym, in respect we could not be ready no sowner, having
forgotten provition behind us at Firando. Soe about 9 a clock she set
seale. God send her a prosperous voyage.

And I sent in her these letters following, viz.:--

  1 to Sir Tho. Smith, knight, with copy last yeare.
  1 to Mr. Tho. Wilson, with copie of last yeare.
  1 to Capt. Saris, with coppie last yeare.
  1 to my brother, Walter Cocks.
  1 ould to Mr. Fosters wife, enclosed to Capt. Saris.
  1 to Wor. Company, with coppies of last yeare; with coppie from
    Syam, Camboia, and Champa.
  1 to Capt. Georg Ball, of l5th curant.
  1 to Capt. Raphe Coppindall, of l5th curant.
  1 to Mr. Westby.
  1 to Worll. Company, of 17th ditto.
  2 to my nephew, Jno. Cocks.

_February 21._--Taccamon Dono sent me a wild boare for a present.

_February 22._--By meanes of contrary wyndes the ship _Adviz_ retorned     17
back to Cochy; and Mr. Wickham sent a letter to have a boate sent hym
to com ashore, which I sent to hym. So he and Mr. Totton came ashore
after nowne.

I wrot a letter to Sir Tho. Smith, how I was enformed Mr. Ed. Willmot,
defunct purser of the _Adviz_, dying at Bantam, left me a legasie
of 3 _l._ str., to pay in England.

I left a remembrance with Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick at my going to
Langasaque, to look to howse in my abcense.

_February 23._--We set forwardes towardes Langasaque this mornyng, and
passing by the ship _Adviz_, they shot affe 5 peces ordinance. And we
went to bed to Setto,[5] 17 leagues from Firando. We paid 1 _tay_ for
our lodging and 3 _mas_ for fish.

     [5] Seto.

_February 24._--We arived at Langasaque at 1 clock after nowne.

Many Chinas, Japons, and Portingals, and Spaniards came to vizet me,
knowing of my arivall. Yt is said the carick will not goe out this
yeare for feare of Hollanders.

_February 25._--We sent presentes this day, viz. To Saco Dono,
Riyoyets Dono, Soyen Dono, Saquemon Dono, and Saquise Dono,
magistrates in Langasaque, each one 2 _barsos_ wyne, 2 fyshes. And to
Capt. Whow and his wife, 1-1/2 _tatta_ sad blew cloth, 1 glasse
bottell of annise water.

And divers Chinas brought me presents, viz., Shinquan, 10 boxes
marmelad, 4 _cattis_ comfets, 150 egges; Ickquam came from Cort,
1 _barso_ wyne, 170 egges; Yongsham, 20 loves of bread; Niquan, 2
barilles wyne, 2 pec. red cheremis, 60 oringes, 140 egges.

We had news that the Hollandes junck, which went out two months past
towardes Syam, is put back into the Liqueas; and the _Gallias_             18
Holland shipp into Xaxma, having lost her mast.

Shiquan, the rich China, owner of the junk Ed. Sayer goeth in for
Cochinchina, envited us to dyner to morrow; and Capt. Whaw the day
after.

_February 26._--We went to Shiquan the China to dyner, where we had
extraordinary entertaynment and good cheare.

And at my retorne, I fownd Soca Samma sent me a present of 2 _barsos_
wyne, 2 bundelles sea weed; Saquamon Dono, 2 _barsos_ wyne and cuttell
fish, with many complementall words and offer of frendship. Also Jorge
Durois sent me 3 mi[n]ced pies and a dishe of oranges. And from
Niquan, a China, 18 peares and 60 _micanos_.

And I sent a present to Jor. Durois of 2 pec. of callicos, bought of
Hollanders, at 1 _tay_ pece, and a glasse bottell of annis water, and
another of _morofack_; and withall delivered hym dyvers cullers silke
to get 12 peare silke stockinges knyt for Mr. Wm. Nealson.

We had newes this day that our junk _Sea Adventur_ is retorned the
second tyme into Xaxma, and that there grew some broyle theare betwixt
som Portingals bound out in a junck for Camboja and Mr. Eaton. The
reason grew because the Portingales picked occation because Mr. Eaton
passed by them without puting affe his hat (he being bound to doe no
more to them then they to hym); so that from wordes they fell to
blowes, but the Portingalles were well beaten and driven abord. Soe
after, they complayned to the justice that our junck had no _goshon_
nor passe from themperor of Japon, but went out on pilfering.
Whereupon the justice of Xaxma demanded of Mr. Eaton yf he had any
passe (or _goshon_) from themperour or noe. To which he answered he
had, and shewed it unto them, desyring them to tell hym wherefore they
asked such a question, the which they tould them was by reason of the
Portingalles information. "Whie, then," said he, "I pray yow demand        19
whether they have any passe or noe, for it may be they are theeves and
would put it upon others." Which being brought in question, they were
fownd to have no passe. Soe they cauced their junck to be brought on
shore, and 15 or 16 Japons to be laid handes on which went in her. And
the Kyng of Xaxma wrot forthwith to court of Japon to know the
Emperours pleasure, whether they should procead on voyag or noe.

_February 27._--We were envited to Capt. Whaw, the China, to dyner,
where we were extraordenarely entertayned, with musick at our entry,
with the lyke at first, second, and therd course, where there wanted
not wyne of all sortes, and each one a dansing beare to serve us,
_nifon cantage_.

I gave the China Capt. 2 letters of favour more to the English shiping
they met at sea, with 3 flagges, two new and one ould.

_February 28._--I delivered 5 bandes and 5 peare cuffes to Spanish
woman to make.

Sanquan, a China, sent me 65 egges, 2 _barsos_ wyne, 2 greate fyshes,
and 2 _cattis_ diet bread. Also Sanquishe, the governors brother,
brought me 95 egges.

I shewed our conyskins, lambskins, and fitchet skyns to China Capt.
and his brother; but it seemeth they had no stomock to buy them, yet
heretofore they said they would buy them all.

_Marche 1._--I gave a flag and a letter favor to a China which goeth
to Taccasanga.

The boteswane of the junk of Giquan, wherin Ed. Sayer came from Syam 2
years past, came to me, being ernest to have me geve hym a letter of
discharg tuching the sute I have against Cazanzeque the purcer. But I
denied hym, for I heare the purcer and he are consorts in thefte.

_Marche 2._--I rec. 4 letters this day from Mr. Eaton out of Xaxma, 1      20
dated in Congushma,[6] the 12th January, and the other 3 in Tomare,
the 2th, 12th, and 20th February, in which he wrot me of the kynd
usage the Kyng of Xaxma cauced to be geven to hym and to helpe our
junck. Also he advised how the Portingalles complayned that we were
theeves, and came to take their junck, not having the Emperours pas;
but it proved we had one and they non, by which meanes they fell into
danger.

I also rec. 12 Japan letters from Miaco, Sakay, Osaky, Firando, and
out of Xaxma.

A China pilot brought me a present of 5 pound citrons and 80 egges;
and Capt. Adams host, 60 _micanas_ (or oringes), and the boteswains
wife of our junk _Sea Adventure_, 4 rowles of bread. Also a China,
whoe was hurt in his lip, brought a present of 2 _barsos_ wyne, 2
greate fyshes, and 12 lobstars, with a bar plate to Robert Hawley, for
dressing of his lip. The plate I cauced to be retorned, but the rest
Robt. Hawley took.

I went and vizeted ould Gorge Durons (_sic_) with Capt. Adames and
rest, he using us kyndly. I gave his littell son Jonico a Riall of 8.

     [6] Kagoshima.

_Marche 3._--I retorned answer to Mr. Eaton per same expres he sent
letter by.

We dyned at Goquan, a Chinas, this day, where we were well
entertayned.

_Marche 4._--We were envited to dyner to the plate fownder (or mynt
man) called Gota Shozamon Dono, where we had good cheare after
Christion fation, syting at a hie table with cheares. But the good man
of howse did not eate with us, which [made] me jelous of poison. But
in the end he came and drank with us. I think his abcense was for that
he is a papist Christion, and now tyme of Lent. The China Capt. was at
dyner with us. I gave this mans two children, each of them, a R. of 8.

_Marche 5._--I sent presentes as followeth, viz.:--                        21

  To Fingo Shiquan, the rich China, 2 _tatta._ yelo bayes, 1
    fowling peec.
  To Goquan, other rich China, 2 _tatta._ yelo bayes, 1 fowling
    peec.
  To Capt. Whow, China Capt. brother, 1 fowling peec.

These men are emploid about geting trade into China.

  To Goto Zhozabra Dono, mynt man, 2 _tatta._ yello bayes.
  To Chimpow, capt. junk which Ed. Sayer goeth in, two _tatta._
    yello bayes, 2 _barsos_ wyne, 2 fyshes.

And an ould China called Shiquan sent me two _barsos_ wyne, egges
50, oranges 30, diet bread a platterfull. And from a China which went
to Kagalion, 2 _barsos_ wyne, 5 bundelles sea weed. And I gave
this China an English flag and a letter of favor, at request of China
Capt.

Also I sent a present to a China called Chimtay.

_Marche 6._--I went to Capt. Whowes with Andrea Dittis, the China
Capt., and Capt. Adames, where we translated one of the Kinges Matis.
letters into China, dated in Westminster Pallace, the 10th January
1614, and 12th yeare of His Matis. rayne of Great Brittany, France,
and Ireland; wherof I took 3 coppies in Chinas. One was sent to China
with the said letter, an other to send for England, and the therd to
keepe my selfe.

I gave Fingo Shiquan, the China, a letter of favour and an English
flag in his junck.

Co Jnos. kynsman brought me a present of a marchpane made lyke a miter.

_Marche 7._--News came to Langasaque that they should make very
dilligent search for padres (or pristes) and in whose howse they were
fownd, not only to kill all that famely, but allso all the street in
which they are fownd.

I sent a bar plate, containing 3 _tas_ 9 _mas_, to the China musitions
which plaid at Capt. Whows when we weare at dyner. Also I sent the
rest of a pece of straw culler baies for a present to a China called       22
Lanquin Niquan, he coming the other day to vizet me with a present,
and is of the place neare unto that we hope to enter for trade.

And I paid the China notory for translating the kinges letter x _tais_
iij _mas_.

The China Capt. went late at night towardes Firando, per whome I wrot
a letter to Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick that I ment to follow within
2 daies. His going was to put money into the 2 junkes afforsaid.

_Marche 8._--Ric. Hoodson paid Georg Durons for sope and candelles,
viz:--

                            _ta.  m.  co._
  For 18 cakes sope           1   0    0
  For 128 tallo candelles     1   6    0

_Marche 9._--I gave the dansing bears 4 _ta._ 5 _m._, and ther servant
4 _mas_. And I paid the shew maker, for 2 peare clampes and 2 peare
pumps, 1 _ta._ 2 _m._

Ric. Hudson paid 1 _tay_ 3 _mas_ for a vyne tree to be carid to
Firando.

_Marche 10._--Niquans junk departed towardes Tonkyn this day.

I gave Jorges doughter 2 _mas_, her father (Capt. Adams host) sending
me a hare.

_Marche 11._--Sanquishe Dono, the governors brother, sent me a
banketing box, meates, fish, and other matters, _nifon cantange_, with
2 bottels wyne, with many complementall wordes.

The dansing beares came againe, and I gave them a bar plate of 3-1/2
_tais_.

_Marche 12._--Tozayemon Dono deliverd Ed. Sayer 41 _picull_ 39
_cattis_ 6 _ta._ goco copper, which he laden abord Fingo Shiquans
junck for voyag to Cochinchina, at 65 _mas picull_.

A China, which was capt. of junck which goeth to Cagellon, died on the
sudden this day, as they think being blasted.

_Marche 14._--A Portugez called Garçia Machado, a Portugez of Amacau,      23
came to me at such tyme as a Japon was about to sell me a rapier and
dagger, which he laid cleame to, as being stolne from hym per a
silvere smith with 15 _tais_ of plate he had deliverd hym to plate the
sword and dagger. The dagger hilt was plated, but not the rapier. Soe
he rec. it out of the Japons owne handes, and gave me a recept to save
me harmlesse, yf in case it were brought in question.

There was an extreme storme or tuffon this day, which drove one of the
China junckes on shore; and, had it not byn for good helpe, she had
byn cast away. Wynd vering to N.W.

_Marche 16._--I delivered iij C. _tais_ plate bars to the China Capt.
to goe in adventure for Tacca Sanga or Isla Fermosa, and Mr. Osterwick
paid hym iij C. _tais_ more at Firando, in all vj C. _tais_, and goeth
for accompt of Right Honble. and Worll. Company, our emploiers, to be
disbursed for silke. God send a prosperous voiage.

I envited Capt. Adames, Yasimon Dono, Mr. Sayer, and Robt. Hawley, and
had the dansing beares, which cost ij _tais_ plate bars, and two _mas_
small plate geven their boy, all paid my selfe.

Shoyemon Dono, the master of dansing beares, came and brought me a
present of 2 _barsos_ wyne and 16 loves bread.

Ghiquans junck went downe to Facondo; soe Capt. Adames, Ed. Sayer, and
Robt. [Hawley] took ther leave and went abord.

_Marche 17._--I gave dansing bears one bar plate containing 3 _tais_,
and 4 _mas_ to _neremonnears_[7] brought them.

This night about son seting the junck of Fingo Shiquan put to sea,
wherein Capt. Adames went pilot, and Ed. Sayer and Robt. Hawley            24
for Worll. Company, Chimpow a China being capten.

Tachemon our cooke had 3-1/2 small plate, which he paid to Jor. Durons
to reedeme his son, and the money goeth on his wagis.

     [7] The bearers of the sedan chairs or _neremons_.

_Marche 18._--I delivered 30 _tais_ plate bars to Andrea Dittis, China
Capt., for our diet since we came to Langasaque; but he would have
taken nothing, it being in a howse of his slave where we la. Also I
ment to have geven the good wife a bar plate of 4 _ta._ 4 _m._, and an
other bar to servantes of 3 _ta._ 1 _m._ 8 _co._, and a therd to the
children, containing 2 _ta._ 4 _m._ 3 _co._; but he would not suffer
me to geve nothing to wife nor servantes, but the 2 _ta._ 4 _m._ 3
_co._ to the children.

Albartus the Hollander came to Langasaque this day and came to vizet
me, and tould me he ment to have sent 1000 or 2000 _tais_ plate in the
junck where Capt. Adames went, yf she had not departed from hence
before he came. So now he menes to send it in the junck of Barnardo.

_Marche 19._--I rec. 2 letters from Mr. Osterwick and Mr. Nealson,
dated in Firando, le 17th currant, sent per a Japon, advising of the
needfull, namely, how the King of Firando had geven a streete of above
50 howses joyning to their howse, to pull it downe and build their
howse larger with 2 new warehowses (or gadongs). I wish we had our
howse at Langasaque, and then let the Hollanders domener at Firando,
for out of dowbt they pay for it.

Phesemon Dono, a kinsman of Sugian Dono of Umbra, came to vizet me,
being an inhabitant of Langasaque, and had built a howse (second to
our lodging), reared but 2 dais past, offering me greate frendship,
enviting me to his howse, he having maried a frend of Gonrok Donos,
governor of this place, she being a Christian, whoe urged me much to
know our principles of religion, and whether we had churches in our
cuntrey. Unto all which I answered in particular that we had both          25
archbushopps, bushops, and other sortes of church men, but not mas
pristes which said service in Lattin, but in our owne language, etc.

Palle the _bozes_ father, called Yoshiemon, came and brought me a
present, 2 fyshes; and I gave his littell doughter he brought with
hyme a peece of two single Rialls.

_Marche 21._--I bought a _catabra_ for Tango Dono, cost in plate bars
6 _tais_.

_Marche 22._--We departed from Langasaque towardes Firando in the
after nowne, and the dansing beares with Mr. Saris host were in the
way in 2 boates with severall bankits; unto whom I gave a bar plate 4
_ta._ 4 _m._ to make mery at retourne. The China Capt., Albartus, and
Tozeyamon Dono went with us and went to Setto this night, lying abord
bark.

_Marche 23._--We arived at Firando after dyner this day, and Tozayemon
Dono and other merchants of Sackay envited them selves to our _fro_.

_Marche 24._--Three of the kynges soldiers being in drink (as it is
said) fell out, and two of them drue their _cattans_ and kild the
therd, and after thought to flie in to the mountans, but were
instantly followed by Oyen Dono and cut in peeces with his owne
handes, telling them they were villens and cowards, not worthie the
name of soldiers, that, having kild a man, did run away and not kill
them selves according to order of Japon.

_Marche 25._--I envited the King of Firando to dyner for Sonday next,
with such noble men and others as it pleased hym to bring with hym;
which he tooke in good parte, and named these 12 persons, besides hym
selfe, to accompany hym, viz. Tonomon Samma, Bongo Samma, Sangero
Samma, Taccamon Dono, Shesque Dono, Gonosque Dono, Sofo Samma,
Sichsaymon Dono, Jubio Dono, Oyen Dono, Torozemon Dono.

Ther was but one of the 3 soldiers kild outright, but two wownded, the     26
one his arme and shoulder halfe cut offe, and the other all the side
of his cheeke and one eye, but both soe sore wounded that nether lyke
to escape it. He which did it (and is dead) was brother to Shosque
Dono, whoe lately cut his bellie, as I noted heretofore. The quarrell
was about a woman whoe this Shosque was in love withall, and, as it
should seeme, jolose, did use the other two as afforsaid, leveing them
for dead, and then went into the chamber where the woman was, calling
her aparte, and cut her throate and put her into a chist, and after
came and knockt at dore where the kyng was, having two _cattans_
drawne, as it is thought, to have kild the king in reveng of his
brothers death. The king hym selfe openyng the dore, thinking it had
byn his brother, Tonomon Samma, which knockt, but seeing the other
armed in that sort, and having his _cattan_ drawne before,
hearing the nois was made, did strike Shosque a deadly bloe over the
bellie, and was seconded with Oyen Dono with a _langenack_ and
one of his pagis with a lance, whoe made an end of hym and cut affe
his head.

Ould Synemon Dono sent his yong doughter of 3 months ould, with her
nurce, and brought me a _barso_ of wyne and egges for a present.
And I gave the child a silk coate, and the nurce 5 _mas_ in small
plate.

_Marche 27._--The King of Firando sent me a doe or veneson for a
present, with many complementall words.

_Marche 28._--Capt. Speck sent me an other bottell Spanish wyne, with
offer of any other matter in the Duch howse, knowing we had envited
the kyng.

_Marche 29._--The kinge and rest of noble men _ut supra_ came to dyner
and, as they said, were entertayned to theire owne content, and had
the dansing beares to fill them wyne, _nifon catange_ (or Japon
fation), with a blind fidler to singe, ditto.

And in respect the king is going up to Edo, yt was agreed to geve hym      27
a present of 5 peeces of stuffe, viz. damask, velvet, and grogren,
severall cullers, bought of China Capt. at 5 _tais_ per peece.

_Marche 30._--Sent a bar plate of 4 _ta._ 3 _mas_ to dansing bears;
and to Skyamon Dono and the kinges cook, each of them, 2 _tatta._
fustion, to make them breeches; and to Yasimon Dono, a _bose_, and to
the gilder, each of them, a _barsoe_ of wyne and fyshes; and to an
ould cook 5 _mas_; and to other 2 carvers, 6-1/2 _mas_ per peec., and
to the blind fidler.

_Marche 31._--I wrot another letter to Jor. Durons, to Langasaque, and
sent hym 3-1/2 _gantas_ of _jurialin_, cost me 1 _mas_ 4 _condrin_,
and wrot hym to send me som gardin seed, espetially carret seed,
called in Japon _ningin_.

I lent the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, fyve silk _keremons_ with silk
watta, of them geven me at Japon Cort. The occation he borrowed them
is for that he sendes his doughter to Langasaque to be betrothed to
Goquans son, and geves her 50 _keremons_, with other matters amounting
to above 300 _tais_, as China manor is.

_Aprill 1._--Skiemon Dono took the bar plate that should have gone to
_cabokes_ (or dansing beares), being 4 _ta._ 3 _m._, and sent them but
3 _tais_ small plate. Soe he kept 2 _tais_ wanting 4 _condrins_ to hym
selfe. Which coming to my knowledg, I caused restetution.

There was 2 _tais_ small plate with 6 _cattis_ gunpolder geven to two
Chinas for making fireworkes.

We bought 1484 fagottes of wood, every faggot being 1/2 a _tatta_ in
the band, and 20 fagg. for a _mas_.

_Aprill 2._--Our host of the China howse at Langasaque came to vizet
me, and brought me a present of a live phaisant cock and 10 loves of
bread.

The China Capt. Whow wrot me he understood our junckes were arived at
Goto, wherin Capt. Adames and others went; but that is a tale, etc.        28
Also here is speeches that Shongo Samme, themperour of Japon, is dead;
but this is Japon newes, etc.

_Aprill 3._--I rec. a letter from Ed. Sayer, dated at Narra in Goto,
the 25th ultimo, how they put in there with the junk the 18th ditto,
and, the grownd being bad, were driven upon the rockes, lost their
ruther, and split the sterne post it was hanged at, and were in danger
to have lost all; yet, per the pleasure of God, got her affe, recoverd
the rother, and mended that which was amis, and put to sea againe the
26th ultimo.

He writes me that another junk of Shiquan, a China, bownd for
Manillas, put into an other roade of Gota, and was driven agrownd, yet
saved in the end, and hope to goe on their voyage.

He also wrot how all the junkes which put out of Langasaque of late,
with the 2 went out of Firando, are all driven ether into Goto or
Xaxma. God send them a good voyage.

_Aprill 4._--Jno. Japon paid the carpenters and labourers, and for
tymber and other matters, for building an old China howse, whose kay
we use contynewally to trym and calke our boates, the sum of 10 _ta._

_Aprill 5._--The China Capt. sent me a peece blew tuft taffety, with 2
barrills wyne, for a present at this feast of Easter. And I gave the
China Capt. 2 doughters for a present, whom he sent to vizet me, 1
pec. black wroght satten and 1 pec. blew damask, and lent hym 4 pec.
stuffs more. He also sent me a present of a _caw_ box of China, gilt
and varnished, being in 4 peces.

We envited 10 of our neighbours and the China Capt. to dyner.

_Aprill 6._--The king sent Oyen Dono to entreate me to let hym have
one of my golden fyshes of China, I having geven hym and his brother 4
of same sort before, and now much against my will gave hym one other,
and sent it per Michell, our _jurebasso_, which it seemed he took          29
in good parte.

Sangero Samma sent to borrow our _foyfone_ to accompany the kyng
on the way, whoe is thought will departe towardes Edo to morrow. So I
lent yt hym with 15 ores.

News came to towne that the King of Umbras brother is dead (whoe is
uncle to King of Firando). So it is thought it will stay his voyag som
dayes.

I went and vizeted Capt. Speck, whoe was sick, and fownd hym looking
on the ruens of a hill or mountayne fallne downe against their howse;
the reason being the pulling downe of a ston wall made before to keep
it up, which being taken downe to buld it better, all the hill slipt
downe and fell upon a banketing howse and other buldinges, spoiling
them, etc.

_Aprill 7._--Cushcron Dono, our neighbour, bult and reared his new
howse this day; and I sent hym 2 _barsos singe_ and 2 fyshes for a
present, as he did to us at our buildinge, and each neighbour doth the
lyke according to Japon fation (or _nifon catange_).

_Aprill 8._--Cushcron Dono envited me with Mr. Nealson and Osterwick
to a colation, with all rest of neighbours that sent presentes, where
there wanted no drinking, Japons being well seene in that facultie.

_Aprill 9._--I wrot a letter to King of Firando, to have justice
against Cazanseque and Goresano. The cause I did it was for that I
sent formerly to hym about same matter, and spoake my selfe lykwais to
hym to same effect, and wrot a former letter last yeare to lyke
effect, but can get no remedy, only he answerd he would geve order to
Taccamon Dono to doe me right. Soe this day I sent Mr. Osterwick to
Taccamon Dono, to know his pleasure herein. His answer was, the king
had not spoaken to hym thereof, and without order from hym he would
not meddell therein. Which is the occation I have now wrot this
letter, and sent it per Mr. Osterwick, because the king is now ready       30
to take bark to goe for Edo, etc. The coppie of this letter I keepe by
me, in Japon languadg, written on the back side what it is, etc. The
king retorned me word he would geve such order as I should have
justice; but nothing but wordes have I fownd hitherto.

_Aprill 10._--Sugean Dono of Umbra envited the kyng to dyner this day,
and sent to borrow _bubes_, swetmeates, and other matters: a singular
uuse they have in Japon (_nifon cantange_). Also his yonger brother
sent to borrow 20 _tais_, for that he was to goe up with the king,
and, yf we had no money (as I had non to lend hym), then to trust hym
with the vallue in merchandiz. But I lyked not such mens payment,
having fownd it per experience, etc.

_Aprill 13._--I sent to Capt. Speck to have had 4 peeces lynen to make
me sherts of, and sent money to pay for it. But he retornd me answer,
it was all sould, when I knew to the contrary they had thousands of
peeces of that sort taken from Chinas lying by them. I had bought
before of same sort for 1 _tay_ 3 _mas_ peece, which made me 2 sherts.

The kinges brother, Tonoman Samma, sent to beg or buy an English hat.
Soe I sent him one which I had of Mr. Nealson.

_Aprill 14._--A yong man of Sakay, walking out at towns end of
Firando, met with a villen whoe cut his throte and took 3 _tais_ or 15
shillings str. of money which he had in his purce, and soe escaped.
Yet the man was fownd alive and soe brought into towne, I seeing hym
carid by all bloody. He said he had seene the man before which did it,
but knew not his name. Yt is thought he cannot live.

_Aprill 15._--The partie which had his throte cut yisterday is said to
have donne it hym selfe, because he had spent his masters money upon
whores, and soe wounded hym selfe (but not deadly) to make the world
beleeve theeves had taken it from hym.

_Aprill 16._--There were rymes cast abrode and song up and downe towne     31
against Matinga and other English mens women. Wherupon matters being
brong in question to put them all away, noe proofes could be fownd
against them, but a mater donne of spyte by their evell willers, all
the neighbours coming to speake in their behalves, affermyng all was
lies and that they would take such order that handes should be laid
upon such as were heard to sing it hereafter and punishment inflicted
upon the offenders. I imagen they were set on by the Hollanders, songs
haveing byn made against them to lyke effect before, but not against
us.

_Aprill 18._--This day most of the inhabitantes of Firando, marid men
and their wives, went a gossiping to Tabola, over to an other iland,
many boates being filled with them.

Geffrey the boy wanting 3 or 4 daies, we thought he had byn lost, yet
was fownd at a kinsmans house. Soe I sent hym hom, except his parents
would geve a writing he should serve the Company for terme of yeares.

_Aprill 19._--Kytskin Dono made me a bill in Japons languadge, wherin
he gave me Jeffrey the boy for to dispose of hym hereafter as I would
my selfe, to cary hym into England or otherwais. And Taffy Dono was
wittnes unto it, in presence of Jno. _jurebasso_, Mr. Nealson, and Mr.
Osterwick, and our Japon vintner whome we buy our wyne of.

_Aprill 21._--Jeffrey, the boy geven me the othe day, broke up a chist
of Co Jnos. and took out some thinges, and upon his examenation hath
confest he had stolne dyvers thinges before. Soe I determen to retorne
hym to them which gave hym to me.

_Aprill 23._--I sent both Jeffrey and the writing back to Kitskin
Dono, whoe gave hym me.

Mr. Nealson tould me this day that Mr. Osterwick reported to hym that
he thought I kept 1000 _tais_ in my handes of the Companies, to make       32
my private benefite thereof. Which being brought in question, he said
he thought the China Capt. owed me 1000 _taies_ more then I had put to
acco. To which I replied, it had byn better he had told me therof then
to speake such matters to others; but that, to burthen me with keeping
money of the Companies I took in ill part, and for the China Capt. I
esteemed hym such a man as would deale well with me and hym both.

_Aprill 24._--I brought the matter in question this day with the China
Capt. tuching the 1000 _taies_ that Jno. Osterwick spoke of, noted by
me yisterday, and som wordes were about a parcell of money delivered,
namely of 2000 _taies_, at one tyme, which in the end the China Capt.
said he thought Niquan his kinsman had receved. I stand in dowbt of
1000 _taies_ more, noted downe in my booke the 11th December, 1616,
but blotted out by my selfe this day to bring the rest to rightes. God
grant Jno. Osterwick deceave me not.

Capt. Speck sent a man with 3 peece China lynen, with complementall
wordes that they had non to sell, but sent them of his owne provition
he kept to make hym shertes. I retorned hym thankes per hym which
brought them, and bad hym tell Capt. Speck I would send hym money for
them, which I did sowne after. But he retorned the money and sent me
word he gave them as a present, wishing they were better.

The China Capt. tould me, betwixt hym and me, that Jno. Osterwick
reported (or tould to hym) this day that he was out of purce 500
_taies_, he knew not how, which he had paid out, he knew not how, not
having written it downe.

_Aprill 25._--I rec. a letter from Capt. Adames per way of Langasaque,
dated in Goto, le 28th of Marche last, in the rode (or haven) of
Narra, in which he wrot me of the extremety they passed in loosing of
their rudder.

_Aprill 26._--The China Capt. went to Langasaque with his doughter to      33
vizet his brother Whow, she never having byn there before, as also to
contract a marriadge betwixt her and the sonne of an other rich China
called Goquan.

Yt is now reported that the _Tono_ (or Kinge) of Firando will not goe
to Edo this yeare. Soe he hath geven leave to his hostes son of Osakay
to goe his way, whoe a long tyme hath staid to goe along with hym.

_Aprill 28._--There was a silver spoone lost at supper, and non in the
howse but our owne folkes. So som of them went to a wisszard to know
whoe had taken it. He wished them to look presently out for it, and
they should come to knowledg whoe had it, but, yf they let midnight
passe, it would never be knowne. Wherupon they made a privie serche,
and went about to heate a ston red hott, and take it in their hands,
it being dailie proved that those which are giltlesse goe free and the
giltie burne. Whereupon Bycho (the boy I gave Mr. Osterwick) willed
them to desist, and he would tell them where the spoone was, but carid
them to divers places, they not finding it; and in the end tould them
he had cast it into the sea, willing them to let it alone and say
nothing, and he would bring it back or pay for it, etc.

_Aprill 29._--I brought Bicho to disepline (or whiping cheare). Soe at
first he stoutly denied what he of hym selfe had formerly confessed;
but in the end he yilded, and said he had stolne it at supper tyme,
and delivered it to the servant of a Japon. Soe I sent to that mans
howse, but his servant was working at Hollandes howse, he sending for
hym and Bicho acknowledging he had receved it from his handes, we
being at supper, he being without, looking on a munkie or ape. But
that fello denid it, and his master used many thretning words, that he
would kill Bicho for sclandring of his servant. Yet the boy still
stood to his word that the said fello had it. Whereupon I sent Mr.
Osterwick, with our _jurebasso_, to Taccamon Dono, to seek justis          34
against that fello; but he was gon to the kinges howse before they
came.

_Aprill 30._--I sent Mr. Osterwick to Taccamon Dono, cheefe
justice, to demand restetution of the silver spoone of the recever,
although he denid the recept thereof, otherwais to proceed against hym
by order of justice. He retorned answer, he would do me justice.

_May 1._--Gonosco Dono envited us to dyner to morrow.

Mr. Nealson and Mr. Osterwick went to Tabola with their women to make
merry; but Nealson entred into humours at his retorne, being in potum.

_May 2._--I canot forget to note how Mr. Nealson roze this night,
three howers before day, and called me up to drink, etc., and fell
into termes with me because the neighbours went not out to meet hym
with a banket, laying the falt in me; and, not contented with that,
caused the porter to open the dore to let hym out, as though he went
to walk (as ordenarely he seemeth to doe). But I, wondering he went
out soe tymely, roze up to have geven hym councell to take heed how he
went out at such an hower, but fownd he was gon over the way to Mr.
Osterwickes lodging, to tell hym (in my hearing) that I used them as
slaves and not as merchantes, with stamping and swearing upon it, and
that it was not to be sufferd. I have much adoe with this man in his
drunken humours, he seeking (when he is most soberest) to set me at
odds with all men. God defend my just cause.

We were well entertayned at Gonosco Donos at dyner, and had much talk
about the Hollanders and English, being by hym urged thereunto, and,
as I think, set on by the King or _Tono_ of Firando. But, as it should
seeme, they esteemed much more of our nation then of the Hollanders,
esteeming them as theeves and we true men.

_May 3._--There is some murmering speeches geven out that these            35
sotherne _tonos_ (or kinges) draw back whoe should set forward first
to goe up to themperour, and he of Umbra sent this of Firando word
that he might exskews the matter in respect of his infermity (or
sicknesse), and the rather because no other is about to goe as yet,
except it were Frushma Tay, whose cuntrey is neare Cyaw (or Miaco).
This Frushma Tay is as greate a man as he of Xaxma, and of more
revenews, and loved and esteemed at Miaco more then any other prince
in Japon; and he only is gon to Miaco, and no ferther; and what will
ensue is uncerten. Yet out of dowbt, yf Miaco, that is to say Cyaw,
Osakay, and Sackay waver from themperour, and that Xaxma, Frushma Tay,
and the rest of sotherne lordes take part against hym, he will hardly
preveale. For out of dowbt all the northerne lordes are not sure, no
not his owne nephewes, etc.

_May 4._--A brute was geven out the _Tono_ (or King) of this place
Firando would set forward towardes themperours court, and all the
boates ready to accompany hym. But it proved but a falce allarom, as
divers other tymes hath byn the lyke; only to make a shew he is a
going, for out of dowbt themperour is not without spies in this and
all other places.

_May 5._--I sent our _jurebasso_ to Taccamon Dono, and Bicho the boy
with hym to certefye that he delivered the spoone to that other
felloe; but still Taccamon Dono puts me affe with the kinges going
out, yet that in the end he will doe me justice.

Before nowne the King of Firando went out on his voyage towardes
Miaco, or to themperours Court. The Hollanders shot affe 5 peeces
ordinance at their howse, as the boates passed by; but one recoyled
and strouck up earth and stoanes, and hurt a Hollander very sore which
gave fire. There were many barkes went out to accompany hym out of the
harbor, and amongst the rest both us and the Hollanders. I carid hym       36
2 pottell glasse bottelles of very good strong annis water, stilled by
my selfe heare, and the Hollanders carid a stick or peece of _ginco
callamback_ (or lignum allois) which I think could not be a _li_. He
seemed to be merry, and drunk to us both, with many others.

_May 9._--Taccamon Dono and rest of nobles retorned from accompanying
the king onward on his journey to Miaco; and soe I sent our
_jurebasso_ againe to hym, to procead in justice about the stolne
silver spoone. He retorned answer that he was content I should
proceade to my owne content (or as I would), only their triall was by
fire, so that, yf he I burthened proved to have it, it was to my
honor, otherwais, yf I accused hym wrongfully, the contrary. Soe he
wished me to be well advised before I proceaded therein.

_May 10._--The China Capt. retorned from Langasaque and brought word
how the junck wherin Capt. Adams went is retorned back to Langasaque
(as all the rest which went out are the lyke), and that our junck _Sea
Adventure_ is at Liqueas and lost her voyag for Syam. Also that the
juncke of Billang Ruis (which should have gon for Phillipinas and went
out a month before Capt. Adames) hath also lost her voyag and retorned
back, haveing in 3 stormes (or tuffons) cast most part of her lading
overboard, to lighten her.

I rec. 2 letters from Langasaque, viz. 1 from Gota Shoyamon Dono, the
mint man, and 1 from Shoyemon Dono, master _caboques_.

_May 11._--This mornyng calme raynie wether, but after, a stiff gale,
northerly, all fore nowne, but after vered southerly. Much rayne all
day and like per night following, with lightnyng and thunder; and in
the evenyng, towardes night, was a mighty cracking or rustlyng in the
aire or fermament, as though it had byn the flying of a thunderboult,      37
and yet no lightning nor thonder at that tyme. I took notis of it as a
fearfull thing, and many spoake of it afterwardes.

_May 13._--The China Capt. sent me 3 China golden fyshes, and his
doughter a peec. silk borall, or taffety mad borall fation.

_May 14._--Capt. Adames, with Ed. Sayer and Robt. Hawley, arived this
day from Langasaque, the junck having lost her voyag for Cochinchina.
So Ed. Sayer brought back the goodes and monies sent in that voyag.

_May 15._--I rec. the letter Ed. Sayer wrot me from Langasaque, dated
the 7th present, with 3 coppis letters in it, one written from Liqueas
to me, and other 2 to Mr. Eaton, whoe is in an other iland of same
Liqueas, and hath lost his voyag or monson, yet, as it seemed, ment to
stay theare till begining next monson and then procead on her voyag.
But he advized Mr. Eaton his opinion to lade her with wheate and
retorne to Japon, which course I formerly advised hym to take yf he
lost his monson. God grant he take it.

_May 17._--This day the King Firandos bark retorned from Miaco, which
carid up his horse, and they report that the Emperour hath sent downe
order to Miaco that all the _tonos_ of Japon shall stay theare, and
not goe forward to Edo. Soe it is thought the Emperour is dead, or
else he standeth in fear that the northerne _tonos_, or kinges, meane
to joyne with them of the south and rize against hym. Once it is
thought somthing will happen.

_May 18._--Mr. Nealson went to the bath at Ishew to recover his
health, being much out of temper.

Comissioners, or rather survears, came to Firando this day, sent with
order from themperour to survay all the cuntrey at their pleasure.
What is their entent is not well knowne, yt not having byn donne in
these partes heretofore.

_May 21._--This day was the feast of the resorection of the greate         38
profet of Japon, or rather a god, as they take hym, for som hould no
other god but he. They deck all the forefront or eves of their howses
betymes in the mornyng with greene bowes, in remembrance of his
resurrection.[8]

We sent 1 _tay_ small plate, with a barell of wyne and a bondell sea
weed, to the _boz_, our landlord, for a years rent of a garden hired
at present of hym.

     [8] Marginal note: "Feast of Shacka".

_May 24._--The gunfownders did borow all our copper, to deliver as
much same sort within 3 months, and left on fardell for a sample.

_May 25._--We set men to bale out water and make cleane our small
junck, to bring her agrownd and calfret or mend her, to serve to carin
our shiping, as the Hollanders doe the lyke with an ould junck of
theires.

The China Capt. being sick of the headache extremly, I gave hym a glas
bottell roze vinegar I brought with me out of England.

_May 26._--Cushcron Dono, our neighbour, haveing made his new howse,
envited his kindred and other neighbours Japons to heate his howse (as
they terme it), where they drunk themselves drunk for company, with
howling and singing after a strang manner, yet ordenary in Japon.

I paid vii-1/2 _mas_ small plate to Matinga for covering or shingling
the howse.

I receved a letter from Mr. Nealson from bath at Ishew, dated 4 daies
past, wherin he writes to have Robt. Hawley, the chirurgion, to com to
hym to let hym blood and purg hym.

_May 27._--News is now com to towne that themperour will retire hym
selfe into the ould howse his father kept at Edo, and that his sonn (a
littell boy of 10 or 12 yeares ould) shall remeane in the cheefe
fortresse with the councell to adminester justice. Which reportes doe
conferme men in opinion that themperour is dead.

_June 1._--We had this day 6 ship carpenters and 13 laborers about         39
tyying our littell juncke to serve to caryn shiping.

Mr. Osterwick is falne sick on a sudden with much paine in head and
boanes.

_June 2._--This day was 9 carpenters, 7 cawkers, and 18 laborers about
junck; and laborers wrought all night to have stuffe in the mornyng
for carpenters.

_June 3._--This day 10 carpenters, 7 cowkers, and 20 laborers for
junck.

Capt. Speck came to English howse to vizet me, and is much affeard of
the junck which went owt this yeare, in respect the others are retornd
and lost their voyage. He tould me he howrly expected shiping from the
Molucos.

_June 4._--I rec. a letter from Jor. Durons, dated in Langasaque, le
12th of this month, new stile, wherin he wrot me how Feze Dono had
accused Twan Dono for murthering 17 or 18 Japons without law or
justice, and amongst rest a famely, because the parents would not
consent to let hym have their doughter, and the maid her selfe passed
the same way. But the councell tould Feze Dono they would have hym to
take in hand matters of leeveing and not dead people. Soe then he
apeached Twan and his children as Christians and maintayners of
Jesuistes and fryres whoe were enemies to the state, and hath cauced
18 or 20 to be taken. So that it is thought greate persecution will
ensue at Langasaque.

_June 5._--Robt. Hawley went to Ishew to Mr. Nealson to geve hym
phisick and let hym blood, as he required. And I wrot Mr. Nealson a
letter, and sent hym a barell of skarbeare and 10 loves bread and a
barell Japon wyne for their provition.

We had news towardes night that there was 2 shipps without, and in the
end said to be Hollanders. Soe Capt. Speck sent out a boate to see.

_June 6._--Early in the mornyng the domene (or prist) of the Holland       40
shipp _Son_ came to vizet me, and tould me how our ship _Adviz_
departed from them the second day after they went from hence, or
rather they sayled from her, and since they know not what is becom of
her. The domene tould me they sent the small ship _Gallias_ to
Cochinchina, where they had not staid 3 daies but there entred 6 China
junckes, all which they took and brought them away; and that it is not
a month past that this shipp took 4 China junckes more.

Soe I sent Ed. Sayer to Capt. Speck to use complement of their ships
safe retorne; and he exskewsed hym selfe he had not sent me word
thereof before. He tould Ed. Sayer how they had not medled with any
junck which was bound for Cochinchina, only they had taken 16 junckes
which were bound for the Manillas; and were on the cost of
Phillippinas, where they burned a Spanish ship, all the people being
gon ashore.

Also they say the _Gallias_ was in the rode of Amacau, where they rode
at an ancor serten daies, and the Chinas came abord of them with
provition and silk stocking and other matters, using them kyndly.

I went out to meete the Holland shipp _Sonn_ at Cochy, and carid Capt.
Barkhowt 1 _barso_ wyne, 1 of skarbeare, a hogg, and 5 hense; but he
was on the way, and entred the same tide into the harbor of Firando
without casting ancor. He used much speeches to me of his
proceadinges, and that he had taken Chinas twise, I meane them which
the _Gallias_ had taken before, and after tould me they were of them
they had taken at Manillas the yeare past. Once it is certen they have
taken 6 junckes which were bound from China to Cochinchina, and yet
deny it, saying now it is vj wickes since they saw the _Gallias_, and
that they had put 40,000 _tais_ plate into her to goe to Cochinchina
to trade, and what they have donne since they know not. So yt is easie
to be seene by the wordes the domene tould me all is falce.

Mr. Nealson and Robt. Hawley retornd from Ishew.                           41

_June 7._--Yt is serten that the Hollanders have taken more riches
this yeare from the Chinas then they did the last, and each marrener
hath his cabben full of silk stuffes and musk.

_June 8._--Towardes night the Duch shipp _Gallias_ arived at the rode
of Cochy in Firando. But, as they say, it is allmost a month past that
they left company of 3 junckes they brought in company with them, per
meanes of stormy wether, they haveng put 7 or 8 Hollanders into each
of them, which they now think the Chinas have cut throtes of and carid
the junckes away. They report the wether was soe extreme when they
took those junckes (and others) that they could not discharg the
goodes out of them, because the sea went soe hie, only brought them
along with them, expecting calme wether, but lost them, as afforsaid.
They say that, having taken most parte of goodes out of 1 junck, and
seeing her reddy to sink, they put 900 Chinas in to her, and bad them
shift for them selves, etc.

Capt. Adames did also retorne this day per land because the sea went
hie.

All these people begin to murmor against the Hollanders for taking all
junckes they meete, whether they trade into Japon or no, and doe all
under the name of English. Soe God knoweth what will com of it.

A quarter master of Duch ship _Son_ gave me 6 muskcods.

_June 9._--The Hollanders were in councell to have sent back the ship
_Gallias_ to have looked out for the 3 juncks which they put their men
into. Yet in the end they were of an other mynd, in respect it is
above xx daies they lost sight of them, etc.

_June 10._--The _Gallyasse_ came into the harbor at Firando, and I
sent out our _foyfone_ to helpe to tow her in.

Cornelius Scott, pilot of the _Son_, gave me a littell gold ring with
a garnett ston set in it.

_June 12._--Many Chinas and Japons came from Langasaque to Firando         42
with R. of 8, to buy stuffes of Duch marreners, and wanted not store
of falce R. of 8. Jno. Yossen bought good store of stuffes of them for
reddy money at deare rates, as their damasks, grograns, and sattens
ordenaris, at 5 _tas_ peec.

_June 14._--I gave Mr. Nelsons woman the out side of a _keremon_,
silk, for that shee made me halfe a dozen shertes and would take no
payment.

The capt. of the _Gallyasse_ sent me a _barrico_ of Spanish wyne for a
present, and, after, Capt. Barkhout, accompanied with hym, came to
thenglish howse, where I entertayned them in the best sort I could.

_June 15._--This day Capt. Speck sett at liberty 5 or 6 Chinas of the
princepall in the junck, and gave each of them a bar of plate. They
went and lodged at howse of Andrea Dittis, China Capt. Yt was held
base to geve them no more, being such men as they were, and is thought
that the Emperour will bring matters in question, because these ij
shipps went out of purpose to rob and for nothing else, making by this
meanes his cuntrey a receptacle of theeves, to his great dishonor and
their owne inriching. Yt is thought both Spaniardes, Portingales, and
Chinas will goe to Cort, and cry out with open mouth against them
tuching that matter, and the rather because themperour will not suffer
his owne vassalles of Japon to doe the lyke.

_June 16._--They decked all the eves of their howses this mornyng with
flagges and mugwort, in honer of the great feast which is held to
morrow, being the 5th day of the 5th month.

All the Chinas which are sett at liberty out of the junck came this
day to thenglish howse to vizet me, and said they fownd per experience
the English nation were honorable people, and soe would report when
they retorned into their cuntrey, and made no dowbt but we should          43
have entrance for trade. They complained much of the hard usage of the
Hollanders.

_June 17._--I went and vizeted the Hollanders at their howse, whoe
used me very frendly, and shewed me all their new workes, which truly
is greate, in enlarging the mantion howse with a new hall, divers
fayre chambers for merchants, two new gedonges (or warehouses), with a
gatehowse and duffcote, a strong howse made of lyme and ston to put
gunpowder in, many lodgings for sick folkes and for other uses, beside
ston work for walles and wharfe, etc.

_June 18._--I receaved a letter from Tozayemon Dono, our host of
Sackay, wherin he wrot that silck is risen to 320 _taies pico_, per
meanes that the junckes have lost their voyages this yeare.

_June 19._--We sent a present to an ambassador of Xaxma that is now
com to towne, viz. 2 _tatta_ fustion to make hym a vest, and 2
tablebooks.

_June 20._--Jorge Durons writes me the Amacan shipp is safely arived
at home, as they are advized per a junck of Camboja which went
thither.

The ambassador of Xaxma came to thenglish howse and brought me a
present of a barell wyne and vj fyshes, offring to send me a letter
for Liqueas, or any other matter I would demand.

A mad gentellman (as it is said), having byn pocessed with the devill
more then a yeare past, was this day at a banket with his father,
brother, wife, and kyndred, they perswading hym to be better advized
and leave affe such cources. But on a sudden, before it could be
prevented, he start up and drue out a _cattan_ and cut affe his
brothers head, wounded his father, allmost cutting affe his arme, and
cut his wife behind her sholder on her back, that her entrills
appeared, wounded divers others, and slue out right his steward (or
cheefe man). And yet it is thought nothing will be said to hym,            44
they which he hath kild being his kindred and servantes, he being a
gentelman.

Also news came to towne that theevs are on the way betwixt this and
Langasaque, 3 or 4 vessells, to robb such as com to buy merchandiz of
the Hollanders; and took on boate, killing 3 men and 3 women; which
others escaping made knowne to the justice of Firando, whoe sett out 4
or 5 vessells, armed with munition and solders, to seek them out; and
the Hollanders armed out a bark with small ordinance, to accompany
them in the action.

The China Capt. had letters this day per way of Xaxma out of a junk
arived theare (which should have com for Langasaque, and forced per
them of Xaxma to stay theare), that the letters I sent are receved by
the noble men in China in good parte, and a mandarin, or _loytea_,[9]
apointed to com for Japon, to speake with the Chinas and me about the
matter, and withall to goe to themperour of Japon about the receving
the Hollanders into his domynions which robb the Chinas. Yt is above 4
months past that he was apointed, and now howrly expected.

     [9] Chinese: _lao-ye_, a title of respect.

_June 21._--I wrot 3 letters to Mr. Eaton, willing hym, at sight of
any 1 of them, to retorne for Firando with the junck laden with
wheate, and not to procead forward from thence for Syam in begining of
wynter, it being dangerouse. These letters I sent per ambassador of
Xaxma, whoe departed from hence this mornyng.

This gentellman had iij _tattamis_ yello broad cloth, xi _taies
tattam._, and Icadono, the gentelman remayning heare, gave his bill
for payment thereof at demand.

I am enformed that Chinas and Japons have byn at Miaco before Ingo
Dono, Lord Cheefe Justice of Japon, to complaine of the theevery of
the Hollanders; and he asked them whether the English did not the
lyke, which they said no. "Well," said he, "the Emperour will take
order for these matters shortly."

_June 22._--There came news that shiping was entred into the rode of       45
Cochy and shott affe ordinance; and Albaro Munos sent his man to me to
tell me he heard 3 or 4 greate peeces shott affe. I know not wherefore
these people doe this but to mock at us, because we have no shipping
com in as Hollanders have, and urge us to send out boates and men to
look for nifells,[10] that they might laugh at us the better
afterwardes. Truly, I think it is not without instigation of
Hollanders, who, although they speake us faire, love us not. Yet I
dowbt not before it be long to see them fall into the trap they
provide for others.

     [10] Trifles.

_June 23._--The barkes that went out to look for the theevs retorned
without fynding any thing. Out of dowbt, they were advized from hence
of what was pretended against them, and soe prevented the danger. For
here is such a company of pedlers which goe up and downe the streete
crying wares, that the lyke I have not seene till now, and after such
a redickalus manner that it is to be noted. And amongst the rest, one
counterfetted the blind-man, and was fownd out, and then fell a
laughing, and was let goe without saying any thing to hym. I saw this
my selfe.

_June 24._--There is flying news that they of Goto have taken ij
boates of the theevs; but I think it will prove a lie.

_June 25._--I wrot ij letters, j to Capt. Whow in answer of his 2
rec., with 3 _barsos quash_,[11] or sweetmeates, as also of differance
in acco. betwixt Andrea Dittis and me (as he saith), by reason Niquan
his kinsman rec. money in his name and made him not accoynted
therwithall.

     [11] Kuwashi.

_June 26._--The Hollanders sett all the rest of the Chinas att
libertie, and gave them their aparell and other luggadge. It is
thought som frend put them in mynd to doe it, understanding complaint
was made to themperour of their proceadinges, and that they did more       46
then the Japons them selves durst doe, not only to take the Chinas
goodes, but to keepe their bodies captives, making Japon the store
howse or receptacle for their theeverie, much to the dishonor of
themperour to suffer it. It is to be thought it are papistecall
Christians which doe it, for they put themperour and councell in mynd
that it was to be considered that these Hollanders, fyew years past,
were naturall vassals to the King of Spaine, and by open rebellion
cast hym affe. Soe that, yf themperour gave entrance to them, it would
geve discontent to the King of Spaine, whoe was helde to be the
powerfullest prince in Christendom; and besides, it might breed som
alteration in the hartes of his owne vassales to doe as the Hollanders
had donne with the Spaniardes, and it may be by provocation of the
Hollanders to make others as they them selves are, to the overthrow of
the state of Japon.

This was I secretly enformed of per a China, thinking I was an enemy
to the Hollanders. But my opinion is, yf the Hollanders be driven out
of Japon, thenglish must not stay behind; for the Spaniardes and
Portingales geve it out that thenglish were they which gave them
meanes to stand out against their naturall prince, and held their
cheefest fortresses in their power, and was to be thought (as som have
tould me) that they and we were all on in effect, allthough different
in our proceadinges.

_June 27._--Towardes night news came that the junck of Yasimon Dono of
Langasaque (which went for Syam) is safely retorned to Langasaque, and
hath brought word that the Hollandes junck and an other of Langasaque
came out with hym, and were at sea altogether, and cannot want to be
on this cost.

And within night Capt. Adams sent me word that the small junck of Jno.
Yoosen which went from Cochinchina for Camboja the last yeare is now
arived in a harbor neare Languay in Crates.

_June 28._--Late towardes night the Hollandes junck from Syam arived       47
in the roade of Cochy, a league from the towne of Firando; and Jno.
Yossens at Tasquey, a league or ij on thother side Firando.

_June 29._--About nowne the junck of Jno. Yoosen entred, which came
from Camboia. They report that one of thenglishmen of the ij is
theare, namely, Mr. Savidge (as they think), fell into a madd humour
and ment to have kild hym selfe with a pistoll charged with ij
bullettes, and shot hym selfe, but after was cured.[12] The other
Englishman is called Facie. These men say that we have somthing com in
the other junck of Yosen, but they know not what it is, nether have
those Englishmen wrot i word by this junck. They say also that
thenglish have built a junck, and sent her for Pattania with such
merchandiz as they had bought in Camboja, and that the king of the
cuntrey is a greate frend to thenglish, but a mortall enemy to the
Portingalles and Spaniardes.

And I sent Mr. Sayer abord the junck of Jno. Yosen with a barill wyne
and 3 hense, to bid the master welcome and know whether we had any
letters com in them.

And Jubio Dono, servant to King of Crates, came to vizet me and
brought a barrill _morofack_; and an other gentelman of that place
came in company with hym, and he envited me and the rest of thenglish
to dynner ij daies hence.

And within night Capt. Speck sent me a packet of letters which came in
their junck from Syam. Wherin one Richard Pittes writes of the death
of Jno. Johnson that was in place before hym, and sent an other letter
which he receved from Mr. Adam Denton, dated in Meslapotama, the 20th
August, 1617, wherin he writes Mr. Gurney died betwixt Bantam and that     48
place, coming to have byn agent for the Cost; and that Generall
Josephe met with a Portingale carick bound from Portingall to Goa, and
fought with them ij daies about the Iland of Comora, beating her
mastes overboard; soe in the end they fired her them selves, and, as
it seemed, escaped ashore at Camora, Bengamyn Josephe hym selfe having
byn slayne at first with a peece of ordinance, and Capt. Pepwell
suckceaded in his place.

Also he adviseth that the King of Callecut detayneth all in his handes
that Capt. Keeling left theare, so that the _Unicorne_ going thether
carid away all our men.

And that from Suratt we have setled a new factory in the kingdom of
Pertia, not far from Ormus, to the greate hartbreach of the
Portingales of that place.

Mr. Pitt hath sent in the Hollandes junck from Syam, viz.:--

                                                  _cat.  tale.  m._
  Silck 71-1/2 _cattis_, cost                       3     11    08
  _Callemback_, 39-1/2 _cattis_, severall sortes;
    iij fardelles _lifas_, or fish skins, cost      0     05    14
  With charges of all, cost                         0     01    04

     [12] A marginal addition runs as follows: "The pilot of Yosens
     shipp told me it was an untruth that Mr. Savidg would have kild
     hym selfe, but rather, going a burding his peece would not goe
     afe at first, but, turnyng the mouth towardes hym, it went afe,
     etc."

_June 30._--I receved a letter from Miaco from Gonrok Dono, to keepe
all the lead and gunpoulder we have for themperour when our shiping
cometh, and the lyk he wrot to the Hollanders.

The Hollandes junck entred into port of Firando, and I sent out our
_foyfone_ to helpe to toe them in. The junck wantes parte of her
lading; soe, yf ours had gon, yt is thought she had had but a bad
voyag. I wish Mr. Eaton had followed my comition and laden her with
wheate, having lost their monson, and so might he have made (it may
be) a saveing, if not a better voyag, for the Worll. Company.

_July 1._--We went to dyner to Jubio Dono of Crates, viz. Capt. Adams,
Ed. Sayer, Mr. Nelson, Mr. Osterwick, and my selfe, where we were          49
kindly used; and I sent hym before a quart of anise water of my owne
with 2 boxes of suger cakes, of them Capt. Whow sent me.

A Hollander, a quarter master, gave me a peece black taffetie and vij
musk cods for a present. He tould me that Mr. Nealson had geven hym a
crosse staffe gratis, whether he would or no, he offering to have
geven hym either money or stuffes for it, but he would not take any
thing, but bad hym take it away with hym. But the Duch man desired hym
to let it ly in his chamber untill he had made a new chist to keepe
both it and other matters in.

But in the mean tyme Mr. Nealson sould it unto an other Hollander,
wherat this man took exceptions, having geven it hym before. Of the
which I tould Mr. Nealson aparte, in frendly sort; but he took pepper
in the nose, calling the Holland ill names, and misusing hym in vild
termes, although Ric. King, our butler, were _jurebasso_ betwixt them
when he gave hym the staffe, he geving hym as bad wordes as the rest
only because he said it was marvell the Hollander would speake of such
a matter, yf he had not geven it hym. In fine he called the Hollander,
dogg, and thenglish as bad, in my hearing, telling me to my face I
sett them all one to misuse hym, espetially Ed. Sayer, my viz-regent,
when God is my judg I have byn taxed with all thenglish in the cuntrey
for suffering Mr. Nealson to abuze all men as he daylie doth. Thus
much I thought good to note downe, whether I live or dye, that truth
may be knowne. I gave hym back his dager this day, he telling me that
Cornelius the Duchman offred hym 80 _pezos_, or R. 8, for it and his
rapier; but he had not had it an hower by his syde but he fell into
this frenzy, madd, or at best drunken, humour, and in my hearing rapt
out an othe, by the blood of God, that let thenglish stand cleare of
hym, for, yf they used hym in such sort, he would speed som of them.

_July 3._--I receved a letter from Alvaro Munos, dated in Langasaque,      50
10th July, new stile, wherin he writes that news is com from New
Spaine that Don Juan de Fashardo, sonne to Don Lues de Fachardo, is
ordayned governor of the Manillias, with 1000 soldiers and 300
mareners, in 3 gallions and 6 galles coming from New Spaine. Also,
that the fleet in Manillas, which fought with the Spaniardes the last
yeare, is all cast away per stormy wether, many Mores, Chinas, and 50
Spaniard being drowned in it; and that their is 8 new gallions built
theare in place thereof. For the 8 gallions, I esteem it a lie, that
on such a sudden they canot be made. Also, that the Frenche have sett
out 8 gallions, or men of warr, to aide the Spaniardes in their
affares. And that the King of Spaine had ordayned a fleete of gallions
to have com by Cape Bona Speranza, to have joyned with them at
Manillas, to have gon for the Molucas; but had staid them to make
warrs against the Duke of Savoy.

Miguell, the _jurebasso_, reared his howse this day, and I sent hym ij
_taies_ in small plate, and a barill wyne, the plate on my owne acco.
Also Mr. Nealson, Sayer, and Osterwick sent each of them a _tay_, all
for Capt. Adams sake, whose servant he was in tyme past.

So, Matias, the Hollander capt. of junk which came from Syam, came to
vizet me this day. He tells me that Mr. Pittes the Englishman envited
one James Peterson, thenglish umper, to a banket at Syam, and after,
upon what occation he knew not, fell out with hym, and went with iij
Japons to bynd hym and take hym prisoner. But Peterson laid soe about
hym that he kild ij of the Japons, and made Pittes and the other to
run away. This Peterson is in greate favour with the King of Syam, and
therefor I marvell Mr. Pittes would take this cours; but Mr. Mattias
saieth it was doone in drink.

_July 4._--We had news that Jno. Yoosens other junck which came from       51
Camboja is entred into Langasaque, in which I esteem we have letters
and somthing else; but no letter came in the other. Our nation is over
slo in writing; the labour is not greate.

_July 5._--News came from Langasaque that a frigatt or ij are entred
theare which came from Amacau, and that 4 or 5 more are a coming
after, and that they bring store of silk and peeces of silk, for that
the carik will com no more. They report that these frigattes (or
galliasses) met with a Hollander or English shipp at sea, and sunck
her; but out of douwbt that is a lyie, only they may have wronged our
junck _Sea Adventure_; but if it com to knowledg they may pay deare
for it, she going under themperours _goshon_, and with Japon
marreners.

_July 6._--I wrot to Antony Biscaino, pilot of Jno. Joosens junk which
is com from Camboia, to will hym to send me my letters the English
have wrot, as I understand they have.

We opened the ij chistes which came from Syam with _callamback_ and
silk, and waid it out.

News came from a Japon of Langasaque to Capt. Speck that of a certen 5
or 6 frigattes of Portugezes of Amacau did meete with a small
Hollandes shipp at sea, and after fight a long tyme the Holland shipp
was sunk with ij or 3 of the friggotes, and the rest soe ill handled
that non proceaded forward but 1, which is this lately arived at
Langasaque, the capt. or cheefe wherof was lykwais slaine and many
others hurt. Capt. Speck sent me word hereof, esteeming it rather our
shipp _Adviz_ then a Hollander; but I hope it will prove contrary.

_July 7._--I sent a letter to Alvaro Munos desiring hym to writ me the
truth of the newes of the sinking of a Duch or English shipp per the
friggattes.

There came news this day that the shipp which the Portingales took was
a Hollander, and that they sunk her, and have brought 50 prisoners         52
to Langasaque. And after came a Japon whoe said he was in the
Portingall frigattes when they laid her aboard, being iiij in all, ij
on thone syd, and ij on thother, but that in the end the Hollanders,
seeing they could keepe their shipp no longer, set their powder on
fire, and blew the ship in peeces, fyring on of the sayles of one
penisse, wherin above xx men were lost in going about to quench the
fire. This fello sayeth he was abord when the ship was fired, and
called to them in the Japon tong that, yf any Japons were in her, they
should come out and save them selves, and that one Japon was saved
only out of her, and no Hollander. But I doe not beleeve that this
fello could escape so free, yf he had byn abord when she was fired,
nether that a Japon could be saved out of her but som Hollanders would
have donne the lyke. In fine, there is so many talles that a man
knoweth not which to beleeve.

The umpras father came to vizet me, and brought me a _barso_ of wyne
and a cuttell fish.

_July 8._--The China Capt. with other Chinas went this day to
Langasaque to look out for retorne of ther junckes from Taccasanga and
other partes; for as yet non are com; which puteth them in feare the
Hollanders have mett with them. God keepe them out of their walke.

Here news came this day that the Hollandes shipp which fought with the
Portingale frigottes is at Tushma, with many hurt men in her. Others
say it is the Portingall frigot which is wanting, being one of the
iiij which boarded her and was fired. Once here is soe many tales that
a man knoweth not which to beleeve.

_July 9._--Bongo Samma came to thenglish howse to vizet me, and said
he was glad it was a Hollander and not an English shipp which was
spoild by the Portingales. He said they were ij Holland shipps, and
that the bigger ran away and left the lesser to be spoiled; but that I
esteem a fable.

_July 10._--I rec. iij Japon letters this day, i from Capt. Adams          53
wife, from Edo, an other from Croby Dono, Capt. Adams host at Osakay,
and the therd from Tozayemon Dono, our host at Sackay, all
complemental, Tozayemon Dono advising that silk was risen to 300 _tais
pico_ at Miaco.

And this day came a bark from Tushma, and passed by to goe to
Langasaque to adviz the governor of the arivall of a Portingall frigat
was there arived with many wounded and hurt men in her, for that they
desired barkes to toe them from thence to Langasaque. This is on of
them which fought with the Hollanders. The other 3 are allready arived
at Langasaque.

_July 11._--Ther came a company of players (or _caboques_) with apes
and babons sent from the _tono_ (or king) to play at our house, unto
whome was geven iij _taies_ in small plate. They were also at the
Hollandes howse in same sort, and had ij barrs plate, is 8 _tais_ vj
_mas_.

_July 12._--I receved a letter from Andrea Dittis, China Capt., from
Langasaque, of a junck arived from Tacca Sanga with som hides and
sappon wood, but no silk at all, non coming thether this year from
China.

And I rec. an other letter from Alvaro Munos from Langasaque, wherin
he writes ther was but iiij Portingals slayne in synking the Holland
shipp, wherin were xxx Hollanders and 8 Japons, all being dead but one
Japon which escaped, who telleth the news, and that she came from
Bantam laden with cloth and som rialles of 8, with cheese and other
matters; and that the junckes which the Hollanders put their men into
at sea are retorned to Canton with all the goodes, having kild all the
Hollanders.

_July 13._--Harnando Ximenes came this mornyng to Firando in a small
bark or friggot which came from Macasar and thought to have gon for
the Phillipinas, but was cast on the cost of Corea, and all the men
dead but 5 before they could get [to] Tushma; and is shee nomenated
before, which we thought had byn on of them which fought with the          54
Hollander which is sunck. He bringeth word that Capt. Copendall is
dead, and that the Hollanders misuse our English men in vild sort and
take them presoners in all places where they can lay handes on them.
He is not now servant of the Company, as he saith, and complayneth
much of Mr. Lucas Antonison, of his going away, and that by his meanes
he was trayned abord, and shipped away for Macosar, and his chist,
aparell, and other matters detayned from hym. So from thence he got
hither. He also sayeth that Marten Prin cometh generall of a fleet of
5 good shipps this yeare for Surat and soe for Bantam. Also he saith
(to my greefe) that my nephew Jno. Cocks is dead at Bantam, and that
he did not hear of the _Advices_ arivall at Bantam, although it were
late before he departed from thence.

This Spanish vessell arived at Tushma is a shipp of som 80 or 100
tonns, and, as I understand, was sent from Manillas the last yeare
laden with victuelles, to have gon for the Molucas, but never went
thether at all, but rather for Macasar, geving it out that they were
at Molucos and had in chase by ij Holland shipps, and forced to save
them selves at Macasar. But being theare, they took councell together,
and agreed to provid them selves of the needfull and to retorne for
the cost of Manilla, there to attend the coming out of the China junck
with their money, and soe to stripp them of it, thinking they might
easely doe it, and all passe under the name of Hollanders. But now,
all their people being dead, they are driven to this extremetye and
send this Scots man, called John Portis, to the Spaniardes at
Nangasaque, to excuse the matter that they were driven into these
partes by meanes of fowle wether, not having any merchandiz in the
shipp, and therefore needlesse to com to Nangasaque, and to this
effect carry a _bongew_ of the King of Tushma with them to certefie as
much, thinking (as is should seeme) to provide them selves of men at
Tushma and to goe out againe upon their former pretence of                 55
boothaling. This much Harnando Ximenes, being drunk, did discloze.

_July 14._--This night past a howse was set on fire, but by good helpe
sowne quenched; yet many barkes of other places being in the harbour,
the men went ashore, knocking at other mens dores, calling for
buckettes, and the dores being opened they rushed in and carid away
all they could lay handes on, and undid divers pore men. But whether
serch will be made after them, it is not knowne, this justice,
Taccamon Dono, being a simple felloe.

_July 15._--Jor. Durons writes me that yt is a Holland shipp that the
Portingall frigottes burned. Also that the Conde Redondo is com for
viz Roy of Goa (or India), and that all in generall have complained
against Don Jeronimo de Silva for his covetousnesse, desyring to have
hym sent away and an other sent to Phillippinas in his place.

He writes also how the King of Spaine maketh sharp warrs against the
Duke of Savoy, and that the Venetians and the Turk take the Savoyans
part. Allso that Prince Charles of England hath maried or is made sure
to the King of Spaines doughter.

_July 16._--Yasemon Dono, Capt. Adames host, came out of Xaxma, and
hath bought store of planke and tymber secretly underhand for the
Hollanders; otherwaies the King of Xaxma would not let them have any,
being noe frend to the Hollanders. Yt is said the Hollanders meane to
make a galley of parte of this tymber to set out against the
Portingale frigotes.

_July 17._--I rec. a letter from Jor. Durons, wherin he writes me that
it is of a certen that the shipp the Portingalles sunck is a Hollander
and no Englishman, and that they have saved many letters of the
Hollanders, which it should goe hard but he would get som of them and
send to me to put me out of dowbt of the matter. Also he writes that       56
ther was above 20000 _pezos_ or R. of 8 sunck in her, which were sent
to buy tymber in Xaxma, to make 5 or vj gallis or friggates to set out
against the Portingalles and Spaniardes, espetially them which com
from Amacou.

The other ij letters were from Capt. Andrea Dittis and Capt. Whow, his
brother, that the 3 junckes which went to Taccasanga, wherin the
Worll. Company had 600 _tais_ adventure, are all retorned to
Langasaque without silk, non being permitted to com out of China, and
that they had sent much money into China to buy silk (from
Taccasanga), but had noe newes what was becom of men nor money.

I forgot to note downe how Georg Durons advized me that the cheefe
Hollander in the Indies is sunk in the shipp that was coming from
Bantam by the Portingales, and that the Holland shipp had taken ij
China junckes, which the Portingales reskewed, and retorned them to
China.

_July 18._--A China brought me a present of a cup of _abado_[13] (or
black unecorns horne), with suger cakes.

     [13] Span.: _abada_, the female rhinoceros.

_July 19._--Jno. Portis the Scotsman gave me a peare white silke
stockinges with ij greene stoones lyke esmeralles, but I know not
whether they be right or counterfett, etc.

Four noblemen of Crates came to see thenglish howse, viz. the cheefe
justis, the secretary, and ij other princepall men, whome I
enterteyned in the best sort I could.

_July 20._--Capt. Adames tould me this day that Capt. Speck and the
Hollanders sent to desire hym to goe up with Capt. Barkhout for Edo,
to carry their present to themperour, for that Jno. Yoosen, their
countreyman, was out of favour with themperour and other princes by
meanes of his fowle tong. So this day the kinges brother hath lent
them a bark to carry them up.

Jorge Durons writes me of a miraculosse matter happened in England
which, allthough I know to be a stark lye, yet I thought good to sett
downe verbatum, viz.:--

Yt is here reported (or spoken) for certen that in England apeared in      57
the fermament a very greate cros, with the crowne of thorne and
nailes, such as our Saviour Christ suffered his passion withall; and
that the Kinges Matie. of England and all his nobilletye saw it and
fell downe and worshipped it; only one prist (a bad Christian) tould
the king and the rest it was no miracle, but a fantesie. Wherupon at
an instant both the pristes eyes flew out of his head, and he died
imediatly in the sight of all men. Whereupon the King of England sent
presently to the Pope of Rome to have a learned bushope to com into
England to treate of these miraculos causes.[14]

     [14] Cocks, as a thorough-going Protestant, marks this last
     sentence with a marginal note: "O monstroze lye".

_July 22._--I wrot these letters following to send per Capt. Adames,
he being now bound up with the Hollanders, viz. 1 to Figien a Came,
King of Firando; 1 to Gonrok Dono; 1 to Tozayemon Dono of Sakay; 1 to
Amanuo Crobio Dono of Osakay; 1 to Neamon Dono of Edo; 1 to Magazemon
Dono of Miaco; 1 to Cuemon Dono, our host Osakay; 1 to Cocozayemon
Dono, secretary to Oyen Dono, at Edo; 1 to Capt. Adames wife and
children, at Edo; 1 to Skengero Dono, hostes sonne of Miaco; 1 to
Sebeoye Dono, hostes sonne of Osakay.

_July 25._--The Hollanders had a bark lent them per the king to goe
for Osakay, and soe forward per land to Edo to vizet themperour.

_July 26._--I rec. a letter from Jor. Durons, dated in Langasaque, the
1th of August, new stile, wherin he writes me much news how Gon Rock
Dono is brought in question with one Lues Tanares, for taking up much
goodes of the Chinas at a loe rate in themperours name, and forthwith
sould them to other merchantes at greate prices, whereby Gonrok Dono
gayned 40000 _tais_, and Tanares 10000. For which they are now brought
in question by the merchantes which bought the goodes of them, whoe        58
put up a pitition thereof all together to themperour.

He also writes that a greate _bongew_ is coming downe to lay handes on
7 or 8 padres, and to cut affe the heades of x or xij guardians, or
officers of Langasaque, etc.

The _barso_ of wyne from Magozemon Dono, our host of Miaco, with iij
jars of _caw_, the wyne for my selfe, and _caw_ for Mr. Wickham, I
rec. this day.

Capt. Adams was envited to dyner abord Holland shipp, and much
ordinance shot affe.

_July 27._--Sugean Dono of Umbra sent me a present of millons, and
came hym selfe to vizet me, using many complementall wordes, and tould
me the King of Figen was dead, and he ordayned to goe to his funerall
in place of the king of this place, as sent from hym. He saith he was
a pagon, and that it is ordayned a new grove shall be erected where
his body is to be burned, and a pagod built in it, where devine servis
or worship must be donne in memory of hym as a _came_,[15] or saint,
or rather more then a saint, for the _camis_ are helde in greate
esteeme.

     [15] _Kami_, the Sintoo deities.

_July 28._--I rec. a packet of letters from Mr. Eaton, containing 3
letters, dated at Naffa in the grand Liquea, le 28th, 29th, and 30th
of Aprill last past, wherin he wrot me of the danger the junk _Sea
Adventure_ passed after their departure from Xaxma, being driven
agrownd at Liqueas ij or 3 tymes, and out of hope at last to get her
affe, being 2/3 partes full of water, he having carid the money and
other cheefe matters ashore at an islend called           .[16]
Yet in the end she floted of her owne accord, and soe they got her
(not without greate danger) to the cheefe iland of the grand Liqueas,
to the port of Naffa. But he writes, when the kinges _bongews_
(or governors of the ilandes) understood it was an English junck, they
sent them boates with men and all other helpe possible, to save her,
by which meanes under God they escaped; and after sent them word to        59
look out thorow all his woodes and forist for tymber, plank, or what
else we stood in need of, for all was at service of thenglish nation.
But this must needes be by meanes of the King of Xaxma, whose vassale
the King of the Liqueas is, whoe had formerly geven them charge soe to
doe, as Mr. Eaton thinketh. In fine, he meanes to repare the junck
theare, and to proceed on his voyag for Syam, yf I sent hym not word
to the contrary. But I hope my letters are with hym before now, to com
away forthwith, at sight thereof, for Firando.

I also rec. ij Japon letters from Liqueas, i from the botswaine of the
junck, and the other from Co Domingo, and a therd from Antony, the
negro.

     [16] Blank in MS.

_July 29._--I set 500 small potata rootes in a garden. Mr. Eaton sent
me them from Liques.

_July 31._--The Hollanders departed towardes Miaco this day before
nowne, and Capt. Adams with them, and had 13 peeces ordinance shot
affe out of the ij shippes, and 3 from the howse. Capt. Yarmans, capt.
of the _Gallyasse_, and Sr. Matias are they which went.

I wrot a letter to _bongew_ of Xaxma which sent the man with the
letters unto me which came from Mr. Eaton from Liqueas, to geve hym
thankes, and an other letter to boteswaines wyfe at Langasaque, and
gave her sonne which carid it 5 _mas_. And the man which brought the
letters had geven hym for his paynes, viz. 7 _tais_ plate bars, to
defray his charges hither and back againe, with 1 bar plate containing
4 _ta._ 3 _ma._, and ij _tatta._ fustian to make hym a peare breeches.

_August 1._--Our hostis of Bingana Tomo and her sonne came to vizet
me, and brought me ij _barsos_ wyne, and 5 bundels of Japon paper.
There came ij gentlemen in company with her sonne, one of them the
cheefe _bongew_ under Frushma Tay, king of the cuntrey, whoe is a man
of greater revenues then the King of Xaxma.

_August 2._--I rec. ij letters from Langasaque, 1 from Andrea Dittis       60
with 9 water millons, and the other from Alvaro Munos with a sword and
dagger for Ed. Sayer. We bought 168 _gantos_ fysh oyle of our hostice
of Bingana Tomo for a _mas ganto_.

_August 3._--Jno. Portus, the Scotsman, envited us to dynner this day:
I mean all thenglish.

_August 4._--This night past came news that the China Capt. junck
which went for Tonkin is cast away at that place by neglegence of the
pilot; but all the people saved. Som say the Japons did muten, and
carid away the money, but how trew it is I know not. Also it is
reported that both the junckes of Kitskin Dono and Semi Dono are
arived at Cochinchina, and they of the junk of Semi Dono are cozened
of 7000 _taies_ of their money, being waid out to pay for silke was
stolne from them, as that was from Edmond Sayer the yeare past.

_August 5._--I receved a letter from Andrea Dittis, from Langasaque,
wherin he conferms the newes of casting away Capt. Whaws junck, not
knowing whether the people were saved or no.

Also he writes me how Gonsalvas junck is arived from Manillas, in
whome his sonne is com from Manillas, I meane Andrea Dittis sonne, and
that Jno. Yossens junck is lykwais arived at Langasaque. He writes
also that iij shipps are arived from New Spaine at Manillas which
bring a new governor.

We had ij _pico_ suger from Holland factory, i browne and thother
candie, to pay as rest is sould.

_August 7._--There came news that a shipp is without, yf not ij, but
what they are is not knowne.

_August 8._--About midnight I had news brought me that the ship
without is a Hollander, and com from Molucos, and that her mast is cut
over board, and the ship much broaken. So I sent Ed. Sayer in the
morning to the Duch howse to know the certen news, and sent out our        61
_foy fone_ to helpe to toe her in, shee being but a littell distance
without and the wether calme. And presently after a French man,
chirurgion of the _Son_, came to me in secret, and tould me that this
shipp without was an English shipp, and one of iiij which the
Hollanders have lately taken at Molucos, not without slaughter of many
men, and the rest taken prisoners, and sent this small shipp to bring
news hither of it, I think of spite to scorne thenglish nation. And,
as they say, an other great Holland shipp, called the _Black Lyon_, is
without, and com from Bantam. Yt is to be esteemed they have taken our
shipp which should come from Bantam, and dowbtfull they did the like
the last yeare by the _Adviz_ which Mr. Wickham went in.

After nowne our _foy fone_ retorned from the Dutch Capt. Speck,
telling our _jurebasso_ Co Jno. that yt was an English shipp they had
taken by order of war, and therefore had noe need of our helpe to
bring her in. And this tyme Co Jno. tould me that out of dowbt it was
the ship _Adviz_ that Mr. Wickham went from hence in the last yeare,
and that he saw som negros in her which were heare the last yeare. Soe
herupon I went to Oyen Dono, the kinges governor, and tould hym what
past, desiring hym to speake to Tonomon Samma, the kinges brother, to
let me have a _bongew_ to goe abord this shipp betyme to morrow, to
take notis what she is, and whether the Hollanders take them selves
enemies of thenglish or no, and in what manner they have taken this
shipp, to thentent I might goe to themperour to have justice.

_August 9._--I sent an expresse to Langasaque with letters to Andrea
Dittis and Jor. Durons, that I am to goe to Edo to aske justice aganst
the Hollanders, and that yf the Chinas will goe up about that matter I
will assist them in all I may.

The Hollanders brought in our shipp in a bravado, and shot affe many       62
guns out of her, and out of their other two. But I had forgotten to
note downe how I went to Tonomon Samma, the kinges brother, to desyre
hym to let me have a _bongew_ to goe abord thenglish shipp which the
Hollanders had taken, to be a witnesse before themperour what answer
they made. But he would let me have no man, saying as yet no shipp was
com in, nether had he heard any thing of the matter till now. Soe I
retorned and sent out Mr. Osterwick, with Mr. Nealson and others, to
look upon her, to see yf they could know her or no. But they mett her
coming into the roade, and soe returned; only they spoake unto them
and bad them welcom, and much good might she doe them.

But sowne after (two severall tymes) Capt. Speck sent his _jurebasso_
unto me to certefie me he was sorry for what had happened, and that
the shipp and goodes were at my devotion. I both tymes retorned hym
thankes: they had pocession, and therefore might make their benefite.
Soe in the end he came to thenglish howse, accompanied with Capt.
Barkhout and Sr. Albartus, using many complementall wordes, offring
the shipp and what was in her at my comand. But yow must understand
they had well emptied her befor, having byn ij nightes and a day abord
of her before. I made them answer, I was sory for that which was
happened, and wished it had not byn soe, and that yt had byn enoffe
for them to have taken our shipp and goodes without bringing in of the
shipps in such a scornfull sort. He made me answer, they were not in
the falt, but them which sent the shipp, nether they in falte, for
that they did nothing but what their masters comanded them. "Why
then", said I, "yt seemes your mastars comand yow to be comune theevs,
to robbe English, Spanish, Portingalles, Chinas, Javas, and all others
whatsover, without respect, and to synk a French shipp going thorow
the straites of Sonday, becauce they should not carry news into France
of the abuce yow had offered them." These speeche did somthing move        63
them; soe they answered me that hitherto they had held frendshipp with
us, and still would do, till their comanders gave them order to the
contrary, and then they would doe as they thought good. Unto which I
answered they might showe them selves frendes to thenglish, yf they
pleased, ether now or hereafter, but for my parte I did not care a
halfe peny whether they did or noe. And soe they departed.

_August 10._--We had a councell this day, wherat assisted me Ed.
Sayer, Wm. Nealson, and Jno. Osterwick, where it was debated whether
it were fiting to send up to themperour, to complaine against the
insolentie of the Hollanders in presuming not only to take our shipps,
but openly to bring them in to our disgrace. Wherupon it was concluded
that I my selfe should take that long and troblesom voyag in hand, and
that Mr. Wm. Nealson should accompany me, as well to look out and
cleare debtes above, and bring reste downe, as also to carry up with
us such matters as the factory afforded, and to buy stuffes to geve
presentes to themperour and his nobles (at least, yf they would take
them), or els to make sals therof, yf they were refuced. Also it was
ordayned to send away a post, both by water and land, after Capt.
Adams, to enforme hym of the theevery of the Hollanders, to the entent
he should retyre hym selfe from them and stay my coming, and not goe
with them before the Emperour.

Soe we dispached a swift bark of 5 ores away, not dowbting but they
will sowne overtake them, for that our host Tozayemon Dono of Sackay
arived heare this day, and left hym at Shimonaseak two daies past, and
I make acco. our bark will be at Shiminaseak.

Oyen Dono came to vizet me in the name of Tonomon Samma, offering me
all assistance against the Hollanders, and wishing me to make hast,
not dowbting but the Hollanders would be driven out of Japon, yf I         64
made my complaint in due forme against them.

Also yt is tould me how the Hollanders have made a greate
_pancado_,[17] or sale of silk to divers Japons, and the silk waid out
and sealed up, but coming to payment there is 10 _taies_ in a _pico_
difference in the price, which amounteth to above 4000 _tais_. So that
much adow is lyke to be about it.

Oyen Dono being gon, Sugian Dono of Umbra came unto me (as from
Tonomon Samma) and wished me to make good enformations against the
Hollanders, wherin he would assist me, and made no dowbt but they
would be banishid out of the cuntrey. I desired hym that he would
assist me in the matter, and that I might be quickly dispached, to goe
up to the Emperour. Soe he went from me to the _tono_, telling me he
would use such dilligence I should be dispached to morrow.

     [17] Span.: _pancada_, contract for sale in gross.

_August 11._--I went to Tonomon Samma, or rather he sent for me, to
know whether I ment to goe to themperour or no, to complaine against
the Hollanders. And I answered hym, yea. "But", said he, "do yow
pretend to comence any processe against them?" To which I answered,
noe, for that I would seek justice against them in England; only my
pretence was to geve themperor to understand they were comune theeves
and sea rovers and took all men they met withall, without exception,
were they frendes or foes; and that his Matie. might doe well to
embarg their shipps and goodes till he better understood the truth
thereof, and not suffer them to carry out victuelles and munition and
money as they did, and to keepe two or 3 shipp to goe a roveing as
they did this last yeare, to take Chinas and all others they mett
withall under culler of them; which they could not doe, had they not
this receptacle. Yt seemed he lyked my answer well, and wished me          65
to proceed therin formally, and that he for his parte would [geve]
assistance in what he could, and write to the king his brother at
large thereof, whome he knew would take my parte against them, as not
haveing yet forgotten the complaint they made against hym to
themperour the last yeare; and that I needed not to carry any _bongew_
up with me, in respect the kynge hym selfe was theare, whoe he knew
would assist me in person to goe to themperour and his councell.

We agreed with a bark this day to cary us to Osakay for lx _tais_
plate bars.

There was som which came and tould me this day that Tonomon Samma, the
kinges brother, and others asked the Hollanders wherefore they tooke
Englishmen and their shipping in this sort; unto which Capt. Speck
answered, it was because we brought shott, powder, lead, and other
munition, and sould it to their enemies. "Why", said the other, "are
the Englishmen your vasselles that they are bound to observe what yow
would have them, and may not they doe as they please with that which
is their owne to any one they esteem their frendes? As", said he,
"they bring lead and such other matters as themperour hath need of
yearly, which now it seemeth yow have taken, that non is lyke to com
this yeare. Soe that", said he, "this will make much against yow."
Whereunto Capt. Speck has littell to replie.

I gave Matinga a silke _keremon_, a _catabra_ of same, and an upper
garment of fine white casho.

_August 13._--I wrot a letter to Capt. Adames to same effect as the
former, and sent it per our hostice of Bingana Tomo to send it from
thence expres.

_August 14._--Tonomon Samma, the kinges brother, sent for me to come
and speake with hym; which I did, and fownd that the Portingalles had
againe made complaint against Harnando Ximines and Jno. Portus, saying
they were murtherers of their capt., with many other falce reportes        66
of them, desyring to have them deliverd into their handes. Unto which
I answerd, that, yf the Portingales had anything to doe with them,
they should goe before themperour, wheare I would answer for them, and
to their shame prove their reportes falce.

_August 15._--I put into one chist to carry up, viz.:--

  1 pece yello shag.
  1 peec. ruch wrought velvett.
  1 pott musk, containing 37 coddes.
  1 box currall.
  2 peec. red cherenis.
  1 peec. black and green grogran.
  1 pec. red damask.
  1 pec. ruch figerd satten.
  2 peec. corse damask.
  2 pec. black ruch taffety.
  1 pec. fyne white China taffety.
  1 peec. Japon taffetie.
  1 pec. yello satten.
  1 peec. ordinary taffeties.
  3 pec. white satten Lymis.
  3 peces damask.
  5 peec. satten, Capt. China.
  1 peec. orreng culler shagg.
  1 pec. oreng culler velvett.
  4 pec. ordenary taffeties.
  6 pec. ruch taffeties.
  15 pictures.
  1 pec. ordenary taffety.

Also Capt. Whow sent me a letter with many frendly speeches, that he
and what he had was at service of me and thenglish nation during life,
for that, till now, they stood dowbtfull that thenglish and the
Hollanders were all one, but now were fully resolved to the contrary;
and that in all hast they would send word to China of what was past,
to the entent to put them out of dowbt.

Gonosko Dono, an ould gentelman, our frend, dyed this evenyng. He was
father in law to Ushanusque Dono, our _bongew_, and the only souldier      67
esteemed of by Foyne Samme, thould king.

_August 16._--We went to Tonomon Samme, the kinges brother, and carid
hym a present, I being reddy to goe to themperour, viz.:--

  1-1/2 _tattamy_ straw culler cloth.
  2 _tatta._ straw culler bayes.
  1 Russia hide.
  3 _cattis ginco_ that came from Cochinchina.
  ij greate gallipottes.
  ij small gally pottes.
  ij Duch jugges.
  ij green tuns.

And I desird his letter of faver to the king, his brother.

Also Taccamon Dono, cheefe justis, sent me a _baroso_ of wyne and a
drid salmon. And sowne after I sent Mr. Nealson and our _jurebasso_
with a present of j peece of damask and ij cattis _ginco_, which he
took in good part, and offerd us all frenship he could doe our nation.

There passed a bark by, which came from Cocora[18] with banished
Christians, to goe for Langasaque. There came som of them to see
thenglish howse, amongst whome were 5 or 6 women.

They say the King of Cocora hath crusefied xxxvij men and women,
wherof 6 men were crusefied with their heades downeward.

     [18] Kokura, at the extreme north of the island of Kiushiu.

_August 17._--I wrott ij letters, i to Bantam, directed to Capt.
Balle, and thother to Camboja, directed to Mr. Georg Savidg, with the
former in it rec. back from Nicholas Marin. And these letters I
deliverd to Andrea Dittis, who gave conveance to them per way of
China.

Capt. Speck sent for Mr. Osterwick to com and speake with hym, of
which he tould me, and I bad hym goe and knowe what was the matter.
Soe at his retorne he said the cheefe occation was for that I spoke
ill of their comanders or generalls of the Indies, wishing me to           68
refrayne my tong, or else to take heed of my selfe. Also he said he
sat still in his howse and said nothing tuching thenglish, as also
that there could nothing be done in thenglish howse but that he knew
it within xxiiij howers after; and that he held me for a furious and
hastie man which misused all thenglishmen in the howse, and did all
thinges on my owne head and spleene without taking councell. The first
point of these speeches Jno. Osterwick made knowne unto me, and the
rest tould unto other Englishmen which gave me to understand therof. I
dowbt this Jno. Osterwick, because his father was a Duchman, and it
may be he dealeth dubly.

Soe, being tuched soe neare by this prating Duchman, I took occation
to write hym a letter in Spanish, the coppie wherof I have extant, in
which I advized that I marveld much he medled in my howsehould
affares, braging that nothing could be donne but he knew it within
xxiiij howrs after, esteeming me a hasty, furious, and he might as
well have said, a madd man, doing all thinges on spleene without
councell. Unto which I answerd that I desyred to know my accusers,
which yf he did not manifest, and that yf any man went upon spleene or
ill will to geve out or speake such ill and falce reportes of me, that
he or they lied in their throtes. And whereas he said he sat still in
his howse and said nothing tuching thenglish nation, my answer was,
they hadd not geven hym nor them any occation hitherto, nether in
taking of shipping, killing of men, and robing them of their goodes.
And, yf I spoke ill of their generall, I did it upon a good grownd,
holding hym as an enemy to my soverigne lord the Kinges Matie. of
England and his estate in taking of shiping, killing his Matis.
subjectes, and bereving them of their goodes. And as tuching his
thretnyng speeches, I did not well understand his meanyng, but gave
hym to understand I did nether feare his wordes nor weapons.

He also sent me word that I might make what hast I would to themperour     69
to make complaint, and that he would follow after at his leasure, and
that I could doe nothing till he came. Unto which I answerd in my
letter that I went not up to themperour to demand restetution of shipp
nor goodes, for I was assured to have satisfaction in England, and
therefore he was deceaved in that matter, and might ether goe up or
tarry at home yf he list.

_August 19._--I receved a letter from Capt. Adams dated the 13th
present, at a place 10 leagues beyond Camyna Seke, wherin he writes me
of the wrack of many barkes, and that the governors bark of provition
is all cast over bord but one peece of ordinance. And that Touan Dono
hath lost his processe, all his goodes confiscat, and his lyfe at
Emperours pleasure. Also that a China bark or junk arived in Xaxma
with much silk, which he had taken from other Chinas and sould it at
Miaco for 220 _tais_ the _pico_; but themperour, coming to know they
are theeves, hath geven them into the handes of other Chinas, to have
the goods retorned to whome they belong, and execution to be donne
upon the offenders.

And this day news is com from Capt. Whow that it is not Niquans junk
which is cast away, but an other, smaller, of not halfe themportance,
but belonging to same owners.

Alexander, a Scotsman in the Duch shipps, gave me 6 China picturs of
saynts and our Lady, paynted upon bras leaves.

_August 21._--Icana Came came to vizet me and take leave as he said, I
being ready to goe up, and wished me to take good councell in my
proceadinges against the Hollanders, and that he knew the King of
Firando would assist me therin in all he could.

_August 22._--Tonomon Samma, the kinges brother, sent me his letter
for the king his brother. And divers others came to vizet me and wish
me a good voyage.

_August 23._--We set forward on our voyag towardes Edo this mornyng        70
about 6 a clock in the mornynge, and at night came to an anker at
Languay, the farther towne, 13 leagues from Firando.

_August 24._--We departed from Languay about midnight, and at nowne
this day came to an ancor at the iland of Anushma[19] in Faccatay, and
there remayned all the rest of day and night following, wind being a
stiff gale at N.E., the sea going hie. We la on shore all night, and
gave to the howse xij _mas_, having made hitherto 22 leagues.

     [19] Aishima.

_August 25._--We departed in the mornying from Anushma to a port on
the maine of Faccata, called Chuiasaquy,[20] 3 leagues from Anushma,
and 19 to short of Shimnaseaque. Here we understood of a small China
junck which was entred into a port of Faccatay, 4 leagues hence,
called Ginushma, being driven thither per contrary windes, but bound
for Firando, laden with suger, purselon, and other matters. But the
_Tono_ of Faccata will not let her goe for Firando, but discharg and
sell her goodes there.

     [20] Tsuyasaki. In the margin is also added the name, Wattary.

_August 27._--I was enformed this day that the China junk which was at
Ginushma, 3 leagues hence, was one of the 3 which the Hollanders took
and put their men into. These Chinas, having lost the sight of the
Holland shippe, made the 7 Hollanders drunk that were put into the
junk, and then cut their throtes; but, the wind being contrary, they
could not retorne for China, but passed by Firando and soe put into
Faccatay, where they staid not longe but put to sea againe, thinking
them selves to neare Firando, where the Hollanders are; and are gone,
as the report is, to a harbor on the north part of Japan, called
Quitamare. Some are of opinion that the junk which put into the back
side of Xaxma or Bongo, whome went to Miaco to sell their silke, was
lykwais one of them, although it were geven out they were theeves and      71
had stolne that silk and goodes from their owne cuntremen.

_August 28._--This day being a festivall day, our host of Wattary (we
lying ashore) envited us to dynner at his owne charge.

_August 29._--The _bongew_ of Faccata envited us to dyner, and sent me
word he was sorry he was out of the place when we arived, otherwais
that we should have lodged in his howse. Soe with thadviz of Mr.
Nelson we sent hym a present of a peece of damask and a bottell of
annise water.

And within night, the wind coming sotherly, we waid ancor and put to
sea from Watary, and paid out in howse where we la these 5 dais,
viz.:--

  1 bar plate to good man howse      2  3   0
  And 1 peece green taffety
  And to his wife, in small plate    0  3   0
  And to his littell child           0  1   0
  And to his servantes               0  2   0

_August 30._--We arived at Shimenasek this day, about 3 a clock in
thafter nowne, having made 20 leagues. Here our host tould me that
Leon overtook Capt. Adames before he arived at Osakay, and that the
bark Leon went in retorned back per this place 5 daies past, and is
gon for Firando, and that the marrenars tould hym Capt. Adames ment to
stay for me at Miaco, which God grant.

Our host tould me that, before the Hollanders went from this place,
there were Japons which brought hym newes how the Hollanders had taken
5 English shipps, 1 of which they had brought into Firando without any
Englishmen in her, unto which Capt. Adames said littell, nether tould
the Hollanders what the others said unto hym; but that was all one,
for one of the Hollanders spoke the Japon tonge.

_September 1._--I receved a letter from Capt. Adames, in answer of
myne sent hym per Leon thexpres, whome he retorned back unto me with
such an unsezonable and unresonable letter as I littell suspected he       72
would have done, saying he was non of the Companies servant, and is,
as it seemeth, altogether Holandized, perswading me not to goe up
about this matter.

_September 3._--We departed from Shimina Seak this day in the mornyng,
and paid out to our host, viz.:--

  For charg of diet, our selves and servantes      07   2   0
  For wyne for bark                                01   0   0
  For rice for bark, our provition                 01   0   0
  For herbes and onyons and redesh                 00   2   0
  Geven the servantes                              00   5   0

More, I gave to our hostis 2 musk cods, and to her doughter 1 musk
cod, and to 3 _caboques_ 3 musk cods.

And at son rising in the mornyng we arived at a place called Yew,[21]
under a hill, without howses, having made this day and night past 45
leagues.

     [21] Yu, in Suwo.

_September 4._--We made this day, till night we came to an ancor neare
Miwarry,[22] 25 leagues, being 7 leagues short of Bingana Tomo.

     [22] Mihara, in Bingo.

_September 5._--With much adoe we got this day to Bingana Tomo, having
made 7 leagues, rowing in raynie wether against the wind.

Certen Chinas came to vizet me heare and sent letters by me for Edo,
telling me that now they knew well Hollanders theevs and Englishmen
trew men and ther frendes.

_September 7._--The wind being contrary, I sent away an expres, Leon,
with letters to Capt. Adames, as Mr. Nealson did the lyke, to perswade
hym from the accompanying the Hollanders, yf it be possible. I also
sent other 2 letters in Japons to the King of Firando and Cacayemon
Dono, secretary to Oyen Samma.

We departed from Bingana Tomo against the wind, and rowed it up to an
iland 3 leagues offe, where we came to an ancor, the wind encreasing.
Iland called Sherais.

We paid at Bingana Tomo, viz.:--                                           73

  To the howse for charges      06   5   0
  To the servantes              00   5   0
  For wyne                      03   2   0
  For wyne for Leon             00   1   5
  And I gave Ochora             00   3   0

our hostis a picture and 2 musk coddes; her doughter in law a pictur
and 1 musk cod; her doughter a musk codd; to her doughter in laws
father a picktur and ij musk coddes. And I paid 2 _tais_ 4 _mas_ to
_caboques_.

_September 8._--We departed from Sheraish and made this day till son
rising next day 15 leagues.

_September 9._--We came to an ancor towardes night at a towne called
Moro, 30 leages short of Miaco, and stayed the tide; and soe put to
sea againe and made 22 leagues till mornyng at son rising. There was
500 barkes at Moro alltogether put to sea towardes Miaco, som of them
having staid there 20 daies for a wynd.

_September 10._--We arived at Osakay late at night, having made this
day 20 leagues.

At my coming to this place I fownd Leon, the expres I sent from
Bingana Tomo, not yet departed, nether had Grubstreet our host sent
away my other letter which came from Firando per conveance of our
hostis at Bingana Tono; which gave me small content. Yet in the end I
perceved per Grubstreet that Capt. Adames had tould hym I had no
reason to complaine against the Hollanders as I did, which was the
occation he sent not that letter after hym. Soe here I wrot an other
letter to Capt. Adames, and sent both it and the rest per post after
Capt. Adames.

_September 11._--Tozoyemon Donos wife of Sakay sent me a _sesto_[23]
(or basket) of Japon figges and peares, and an other _sesto_ of lyke
to Mr. Nealson.

     [23] Span.: _cesta_.

_September 12._--I forgot to note downe that yisterday Mr. Nelson went     74
to Croby Dono, Capt. Adames host, and took a note of all the goodes
Capt. Adams wife or Neamon Dono had sent from Edo, to thentent we
might better recon with them at our coming to Edo.

_September 13._--We went to the governor of Osakay, Shemash Dono, with
a present, as also with another to his secretary, viz.:--

  1 fowling peece, damasked.
  2 _tatta._ strawculler brodcloth.
  3 peeces silk damask, at 6 _tais_ peece.
  1 Muskovie hide.

And to the secretary:--

  ij peces damask, at 6 _tais_ peece.
  And j pec. rich taffety, as good as the rest.

But going to the castell to deliver it, we had answer that the
governor slept and the secretary was biden out to a banket. So we
retorned without doing anything.

I am of opinion our host Grubstreet doth play the gemeny, and per
instigation of Capt. Adames, both taking the Hollanders partes for
lucar. Yf it be proved soe, God reward them according to their
deservinges, and God deliver us from frendly secret fowes.

_September 14._--We set forwardes towardes Miaco this morning.

I gave our hostis ij pickturs and ij musk coddes; and to Woman Dono 1
pickture, 1 musk cod; to the nurce 1 musk cod; to the Anymall 2 musk
cods; and to them in plate bars 9-1/2 _tais_, 2 of which was to the
humerus of Mr. Nealson; 1 _tay_ to their _casero_;[24] 1 _tay_ to
Shisque Dono, and 1 musk cod; 5 _mas_ to their maid; 5 _mas_ for
sowing my bedd.

So this night we arived at Fushamy[25] at supper tyme; but our hostes
sonne of Miaco met me per the way with a banket.

     [24] Span.: _casero_, landlord.

     [25] Fushimi.

_September 15._--We departed this mornyng towardes Miaco.                  75

_September 16._--We set Mr. Jehan the scribe awork to write out an
information against the Hollanders, to deliver up to the Emperour, the
coppie whereof I have both in English and Japons.

We went to vizet the antient monumentes of Japon, and amongst the rest
the pagod, or monument, erected in remembrance of Ogosho Samma, the
last Emperour, which, in my opinion, is the most magnificent peece of
work which I have seene in Japon, both for the greatenesse and
workmanship. And their is 300 _boze_ (or pagon pristes) have alowance
and mentaynance for eaver to pray for his sole, in the same sort as
munkes and fryres use to doe amongst the Roman papistes, and have
their lodginges and buildinges about it in most sumtuouse sort, with a
4 square cloister and other _futtakies_ (or chappels) within the said
compas. All which is seated on the side of a mountayne among a greate
wood of pine trees, most pleasant to behould.

The great _dibattes_, or pagod, standeth in length due north and
south, with 100 pillars on a rowe in length and 6 in breadth, the
greate idoll or imag standing in the midst of the pagod, looking with
his face W.ward. There is 15 pillars in a rank on eache side with
lantarns in them go downe to the gate howse W.ward, with on pillar or
grete lantarne before the pagod dore. And the other pagod with the
3333 images standeth due S.ward from the said pagod.

Our hostes sonne accompanid us and provided bankettes for us in 2 or 3
places in the way.

_September 17._--We went and vizeted Inga Dono, the Lord Cheefe Justis
of Japon, and carid him a present, viz.:--

  1 fowling peece.                                                         76
  2 _tattamis_ black cloth.
  1 Russia hide.
  2 cakes wax.
  3 peeces damaske, cost 6 _tais_ peece.
  10 peare specktacles.

And to his secretary:--

  2 peeces damask, cost 6 _tas_ peece.
  1 pece ruch taffety.

And withall I shewed hym the coppie of the information I ment to put
up against the Hollanders, wherat he marveled. I said they were
theeves, for that allwais till now the Hollanders reported our nation
to be the comune theevs of all the world. "But", said he, "yow doe
well to make the truth knowne, and your writing is well framed. Soe
yow need not dowbt but themperours councell will geve eare unto yow."

He gave me a writing to all places where I came, to lett me have
horses at ordenary rate, and to all hostes to use me and the rest in
my company respectively.

The _mackey_ man envited us to supper, where we were well entertayned
with dansing beares, and I gave them a bar plate, ill bestowed.

_September 18._--I gave our hostis at Miaco 2 pictures and 2 musk
cods; and sent 3 musk coddes to Inga Samas secretary; and gave our
hostis little doughter 1 musk cod. And I cut a peece white satten lyn
to make Mattinga a _keremon_, and gave the rest to our hostis littell
doughter, and left the _keremon_ with our hostis to be wrought with
silk and gould.

Cuemon Dono envited us to supper, where we had kynd entertaynment with
dansing beares, to whom I gave a bar plate.

_September 19._--This mornyng lowring, calme, droping wether, but,
after littell, wind northerly. Raynie wether all day, but much more        77
by night, with an earthquake, etc.

We set forward from Miaco towardes Edo, and dyned at Fushamy, whither
divers frendes accompanid us with dansing beares (or _caboques_). So
we paid out 2 _ichebos_ of 1 _ta._ 6 _m._ 4-1/2 _co._ peec. for dyner;
2 _ichebos_ to _caboques_; 1 _ichebo_ to other women; 200 _gins_ to
servantes in howse; 500 _gins_ geven in a howse per way, where our
host of Miaco provided a banket.

Nota, that our _rockshackes_, 6 of them to carry me to Edo and back
againe, were agreed withall for 4 _tais_ 3 _mas_ per peece, we to fynd
them victuelles. And horses to cary our provition and presentes, at 5
_tais_ 7 _mas_ per horse; and 7 _tais_ for a horse for Mr. Nealson, to
cary things to Edo and then to be free, and pay their owne and horse
charges themselves. Also Mr. Nealson paid the horsemasters 50 _tais_
on acco., and 25 _tais_ to the _rockshackes_.

About midnight or sowne after was an exceeding greate earthquake,
which endured halfe a quarter of an hower. It happened at a towne
called Cussattes,[26] 3 leagues from Otes,[27] whither we went this
day to supper, having made this day 7 leagues.

Soe betyme in the mornyng we departed from Cusattes; and paid out to
the howse, for expenses, 4 _ta._, and to the servantes 400 _cash_.

     [26] Kusatsu.

     [27] Otsu.

_September 20._--A kinsman of our host at Miaco mett us in the way
with a banket, having com xx milles; unto whome was geven an _ichebo_.

We went to dyner to a towne called Ishebe,[28] where we were
constraned to stay all night because the waters were up, that we could
not passe by reason of much rayne which happened. We paid for our diet
at Ishebe 3 _ta._, and to the servantes 200 _cash_.

     [28] Ishibe.

_September 21._--We dyned this day at a towne called Suchiama,[29]         78
and paid for our diet 1: 6: 4-1/2, and to the servantes 300 _cashe_.
And went to supper to a towne called Sheque no Jeso;[30] and paid for
our diet with brekfast 2: 6: 0, and to the servantes 300 _cash_.

     [29] Tsuchiyama.

     [30] Seki.

_September 22._--We went to dyner to a towne called Ishaquish;[31] and
paid for our diet 1: 3: 0, and to servantes 100 _cash_.

And we went to supper to Quanno,[32] where we were at our arivall
(servantes and all) envited to supper by the governor or _tono_, where
I have not had better entertaynment since I came into Japon. I had
laid out a present of a peece damask, a bottell Spanish wyne, and an
other of annis water, to have geven hym, with 3 musk coddes; but he
refuced it, saying he would not take any thing till I retorned from
themperour, his master, offering me barkes for nothing to carry me and
all the rest over the water to Mia, 7 leagues; which I thanked hym
for, having hired others before. And soe per night we departed from
Quano per water; and gave our host, for use of his howse and
_rackshackes_ diet, 1 _ichebo_.

     [31] Ishiyukushi.

     [32] Kuwana.

_September 23._--Som 2 howers before day we arived at Mia,[33] at Fox
my hosts, where we brok fast and laded our horses, being 14. And paid
for our diet and travell 1: 6: 4-1/2, and gave the servantes 1 C. of
_cash_ or _gins_.

And we went to dyner to Cheru;[34] and paid diet 1: 3: 0, and to
servantes 1 C. _gins_.

Here we met themperours eldest sister with a greate trayne after her.

And sowne after we met the Portingalls retorned from the Court at Edo,
it being 8 daies past since they departed from thence. They say the
Hollanders delivered their present and had audience the same day.

Soe we went to Occa Sackey[35] to bed, having made this day but 7          79
leagues; and paid for diet night and mornyng 2 _ichebos_, 3: 2: 9,
and to servantes ij C. _gins_.

This towne Ogosho Sama was borne in.

     [33] Miya.

     [34] Chiriu.

     [35] Okazaki.

_September 24._--We dyned at Acca Sackey[36] and paid diet 1: 3: 0,
and to servantes j C. _gins_.

We mett this day in the way Soyemon Dono and Semi Dono, of Firando,
going downe from Edo to Firando, but about what busynes I could not
learne. Soyemon Dono tould me that themperour knew of the Hollanders
theft and that I was coming up to the Cort. And after, when I mett
Semi Dono, he wonderd at the matter, and said nether themperour nor
King of Firando knew nothing thereof; but I think he dealeth dubly,
etc.

We went this night to bed to Yoshenda,[37] having made this day but 7
leagues; and paid for diet night and morning 2: 6: 0, and to servantes
2 C. _cash_, and to his sonne for a barill wyne 5 C. _cash_.

     [36] Akasawa.

     [37] Yoshida.

_September 25._--We went to dyner to Famma Mattes;[38] paid diet i
_icheboes_, and to servantes 2 C. _cash_ or _gins_. And soe we went to
Mitsque[39] to supper, having made this day 12 leagues; and gave for
diet night and morning 2: 6: 0, and to servantes 2 C. _gins_.

I forgot to note downe that, passing a river, the boatmen misused our
servantes and would not let our horses passe, but gave them blowes.
Soe I showed them a passport or comand from the great justis of Japon,
Inga Dono, wherin he comanded them to geve us free passag without
molestation; which seeing they cried pecavie and followed after me 2
leagues to aske pardon, many other neighbours accompanyng them to
speak in their behalfe, for they knew full well, yf I had made
complaint, it had cost them their lives.

     [38] Hamamatsu.

     [39] Mitske.

_September 26._--We went to dyner to Cagingaua,[40] a towne wherin         80
themperours unckle dwelleth; and paid diet 1: 4: 0, and to servantes 2
C. _cash_.

And met a servant of Semi Donos by the way, lame, unto whome, he
asking for God sake, we gave 300 _gins_, etc. Also I met Gonrok Dono,
the _bungew_ of Langasaque, going downe from Edo, whoe took knowledg
of me before I knew hym, and offerd me much kyndnes in wordes, etc.

Soe we went to bed to Cainagh,[41] having made this day 8 leagues.

At this place I met a China coming from Edo, per whome I wrot to
Andrea Dittis, China Capt., and to Ed. Sayer and Jno. Osterwick, of my
arivall in this place.

We paid for diet here 3: 2: 9, and to servantes 3 C. _gins_.

     [40] Kakegawa.

     [41] Kanaya.

_September 27._--Raynie wether; per night a very storme or tuffon.

We passed the great river[42] and went to dyner to a towne called
Fugieda;[43] and paid diet 1: 3: 0, and to servantes 2 C. _gins_. And
paid 40 men, to helpe us over the deepe river without bridg, 1000
_gins_. And went to bed at Shrongo,[44] having made this day 8
leagues, to get over the rivers before they did rize per meanes of
this rayne.

     [42] Oi-gawa.

     [43] Fujieta.

     [44] Suruga.

_September 28._--We staid all this day at Shrongo by meanes of the
raynie wether, and departed from thence the morowe mornyng; and paid
for diet all the tyme 4 _ichebos_, is 6: 5: 8, and to servantes 3 C.
_gins_. And I gave our hostis a picture and a musk codd.

_September 29._--We made this day 7 leagues, going to bed at a place
called Cambara,[45] and could goe no farther, the way being fowle and
no place of lodging neare. And paid for 3 meales 3: 9: 0, and to
servantes 2 C. _gins_.

     [45] Kambara.

_September 30._--We went to dyner to Yoishwarra.[46] Paid to the howse     81
for diet and to servantes 1000 _gins_, is 1: 6: 5. And went to supper
to Mishma,[47] at foot of the great mountayne, wherin above 500 howses
were burned few daies past. Soe we had but pore lodging, yet paid for
diet night and mornyng 2: 9: 5, and to servantes 2 howses 3 C. _gins_.

     [46] Yoshiwara.

     [47] Mishima.

_October 1._--We went to dyner to a place called Facony,[48] on the
top of the mountayne with the greate lake, and paid diet and howse 9
C. _cash_. And we went to bed to Wodowrey,[49] at the other foote of
the mountayne, a greate towne all burned the last yeare but one howse.
So we made this day 8 leagues. The towne standes by the sea side
called Wodowra; from whence I wrot Capt. Adames an other letter per
expres that to morrow I ment (God permiting) to be at Edo. And I wrot
2 letters to King Firando and Torazemon Dono to same effect. And we
paid for diet at Wodowra 2 _ichebos_, is 3: 2: 9, and to servantes 3
C. _cash_, and to a screvener to writ letters 3 C. _cash_.

     [48] Hakone.

     [49] Odawara.

_October 2._--We went to dyner to Woiso,[50] where our hostes howse
was taken up per the King of Figen. So we dyned at an other place,
where I was taken on a sudden with such an extrem wind collick and
stoping of my water that I verely thought I should have died. So I
sent an other letter to Capt. Adames of my stay per meanes of sicknes.
Our new host, seing me sick, would not let me stay in his howse; soe
our ould sent for me, when the King of Figen was gon. We paid for our
dyner an _ichebo_, is 1: 6: 4-1/2, and to servantes 1 C. _cash_.

     [50] Oiso.

_October 3._--We departed from Woiso and paid howse ij _ichebos_,
3: 2: 9, and to servantes 500 _gins_, is 0: 8: 2-1/2; and I gave
children, in silver, 0: 8: 5, and to a maid servant that attended me
and warmed clothes all night 1 _ichebo_, and to goodwife of howse a
pece rich taffety.

This day we met the Hollanders retorned from Edo, 14 leagues short         82
of Edo, 7 Hollanders besides Japon servantes. There was small greeting
betwixt us; and so they passed.

We went to bed at a place called Todska.

_October 4._--Betyme this mornyng, at break of day, we met Capt.
Adams, whoe came to meete me 10 leagues from Edo. And sowne after we
met 2 horses sent from King of Firando to meete me, attended on by 4
men.

And soe we went to dyner to a place called Caningawa;[51] and paid 1
_ichebo_ and 2 C. _gins_ for howse, and to servantes 2 C. _gins_, and
for charges kinges horses 438 _gins_, and for colation at
Shiningawa[52] 500 _gins_.

And sowne after we met on of the King of Firandos gentelmen sent to
meete me, with pikes carid before hym, to accompany me into the towne;
and sowne after Yada Dono and Capt. Adames his children with a banket,
before our entrance into the cittie. Soe I gave the King of Firandos
men which came with the horses 1000 _gins_, and sent them away. And
sent Mr. Nealson with our _jurebasso_ to King of Firando, to thank hym
for the honor he had done me, and that I was so weary now after my
sicknes I could not com my selfe, but ment to vizet hym to morrow.

     [51] Kanagawa.

     [52] Shinagawa.

_October 5._--I went to vizet the King of Firando, and delivered hym
the letters I brought from his brother, and carid hym a present, viz.
2 _tatta._ of murrey cloth, 1 muskovie hide, 3 peeces damask; and to
his brother 2 peeces of damask.

And I shewed the information to the _Tono_ of Firando that I ment to
put up to the Emperour against the Hollanders, which he read over with
silence, and then called Torazemon Dono to see it; whoe having read it
over, looked somthing sowerly on the matter, for he was allwais a
great frend to Hollanders.

_October 6._--Capt. Adames with Torazemon Dono and our _jurebasso_         83
went to the Court to know when we might have audience of themperour
and deliver our present, but they fownd so many noble men geving
presentes to themperour, it being the 28th day of the moone (and a
festivall day), that they could have noe answer, and soe were put affe
till to morow.

The King of Firando sent me a present of a barill wine, and a table of
cuttell fish drid.

_October 7._--I wrot a letter to Firando to Ed. Sayer and Jno.
Osterwick, with 2 others to China Capt. and Matinga. In that to China
Capt. I wrot for my _goshon_. These letters sent per horsmen.

Codgskin Dono sent me a present of greate peares, of 2 spans about one
peare.

Also I rec. a letter from Semi Dono, dated in Miaco, as he also wrot
an other to Capt. Adames to same effect, to gett hym out a _goshon_
for Cochinchina. Soe this night Torazemon Dono came and brought me the
letter with the ould _goshon_, and Caqemon Dono came in company with
hym and an other gentellman of King of Firando. They used many
speeches to perswade me from putting up this writing which I have made
against the Hollanders, which I esteme is Torazemon Donos doing, for
that he hath allwais byn a frend to Hollanders.

_October 8._--Capt. Adames was sent for to the Court, soe that I
thought we should have delivered our present to themperour this day.
But he remayned there from nowne till night, and had not one word
spoaken to hym.

_October 9_ (_Conguach_ 1th).--Capt. Adames sent his man to Firando
and soe for Languasakey with a _goshon_ for Fingo Shiquan, per whome I
sent the letters for Firando. And gave hym an _ichebo_ to spend per
way.

This day we went and delivered our present to themperour, viz.:--

  2 fowling peeces.                                                        84
  1 de. cloth, black.
  1 de. sadd blew.
  10 peeces damask and satten.
  104 _cattis_ wax.
  10 _cattis callamback_.
  25 _cattis_ silke.

_October 10._--Capt. Adames went to Cort with our _jurebasso_, and it
was ordayned to morow we should vizet the prince with a present, I
meane themperours eldest sonne.

_October 11._--We carid a present to the Prince Wacange Samme:--

  1 fowling peece.
  3 _tatta._ black clo.
  3 _tatta._ primeroz.
  5 peece damaskes or stuffes.
  1 cake wax.
  1 peec. _calemback_.
  4 bundelles silk.

We attended a greate while to have entrance to the prince after our
present was carrid in, and in the end were put affe till to morrow, I
doe think by instigation of som from the _Tono_ of Firando, who
enformed them we came to make processe against the Hollanders. Once we
retorned back, and left the present behind.

_October 12._--This day we carid the present to the Prince Wacange
Samme, or rather delivered it to hym, yt being well accepted of; and
the Emperours factor went with us.

_October 13._--We carid our presentes to Oyen Dono, and to his
secretary; and to Codgskin Dono, and to his secretary.

More presentes geven to Emperours Councell, viz. to Oto Dono, Tushma
Dono, Itame Genuske Dono, and their secretaries.

_October 14._--We carid presentes to Chana Shogero Dono; to the two
admeralles; and to sonne Fongo Samma.

The admerall sent a bark for us, to carry us to a howse of pleasure        85
where he was, and entertayned us very kyndly. So at our retorne we
gave an _ichebo_ to the barkemen.

The singing man and Sugien Donos brother came to vizet me, and brought
a barken [baken ?] box of meate for a present.

_October 15._--A littell before son rising there happened an
earthquake at Edo, but of small contynewance.

The King of Firando sent a man to me with a letter which he rec. from
Oto Dono, advising hym of the present we gave hym, willing hym to geve
us thankes for it. Also Gensero Samma, the kinges brother, sent to
envite me to dynner 2 daies hence; but I retorned answer that as yet
we had not donne any thing for dispach of our busynes at Cort, but
howrly attended the Councells answer; but, having ended, I would com
and kisse his Lordshipps handes, etc.

_October 16._--We went to see the sepulcre of Ogosho Samma, now new
made. A wonderfull peece of work it is, and farr before that of Ticus
Samma at Miaco; and neare unto it is an other monument of Sada Dono,
father to Codgskin Dono, and a pogo[d] of heathen pristes, with a
monument of 2 noble men which kild them selves to accompany Ogosho
Samma in an other world, as they think. A servant of Oyen Dono, who
kept the monument, made us a colation, and showed us all the
singularreties of the place; unto whome we gave an _ichebo_.

_October 17._--This day was the great feast of Shecco, all the Japon
kinges (or _tonos_) viseting themperour with presentes. Soe we could
doe nothing at Cort.

_October 18._--Capt. Adams went to Cort remayning there all thafter
nowne; but themperour went a fowling, soe nothing was donne for our
dispach.

I sould this day 5 _tay_ wight of corall for 43 _tais_.

_October 19._--I forgot to set downe how Cakeyamon Dono came to vizet      86
me, telling me he came new out of cuntrey from the funerall of Oyen
Donos wife. He also advized me that I should not think ill of hym, yf
he ware forward in wordes to speake in the Hollanders behalfe in
presence of the King of Firandos people, for that he did it of
purpose. This is a craftie fello. I sent hym a present this day, viz.
1 pece fugered satten, cost 8 _tais_; 1 branch corall, containing 2
_mas_ 9 _condrins_.

The King of Firando sent one of his gentellmen to vizet me, with many
complementall wordes and offers of greate frenshipp, and that he
wanted not to labour to get our dispach. I retorned his Highnes many
thankes; but rather imagin he standeth in dowbt we goe about to get
lycense to send our shiping to Langasaque, in respect we desire to be
apart from the Hollanders, and in that he is not deceaved. But whether
it will take effect or no, I know not, only the Emperours factor sent
me word per Capt. Adames it would.

_October 20._--We went and vizeted Oyen Dono, the secretary, but had
but one word with hym, he only biding us wellcom and so went to Cort.
I thought to have delivered hym the writing I had made against the
Hollanders; but he went away without it, although he saw me have it in
my hand. So I gave it to his secretary, Cacakayemon Dono, whoe of hym
self promised me to deliver it to hym at his retorne.

I also went and vizeted the King Firando, and carid hym 3 branches
corall, containing 5 _mas_, and a bottell of strong water; and to his
brother a branch of corall containing 2 _mas_ 2 _condrin_. The king I
fownd in company with certen caveleros whoe went lyk wais to vizet
hym, he being very weake and full of the French disease, soe I think
he will not live longe.

_October 21._--I went and vizeted the Emperours merchant or factor,
and carid hym a present of 2 branches corall, containing 5 _mas_, with
a bottell hoot distild water.

I receved 18 _tais_ for 18 _mas_ wight corall of my owne, and 2 _tais_     87
for a landshast of Companis, sould per Capt. Adams.

We were envited to dyner to Yada Dono, where we were kyndly
entertayned.

_October 22._--I sould 18 _mas_ 1 _condrin_ wight of corall at 10 per
one silver, is 18 _tais_ 1 _mas_, trusted.

Capt. Adames was all day at Cort, expecting answer for our dispach,
but did nothing, most of the Councell being gon to honer a pagod where
Ogosho Samas was bured, 3 daies journey hence, the seremony being to
be observed the 17th day of this moone after Japon stile, which was
the day of this buriall.

_October 23._--Capt. Adames was all day at Cort to get our dispach,
but retorned without doing of any thing.

_October 24._--Not having busynes to doe by meanes the Councell were
abcent about seremones of the ould Emperours mortuary, we went and
vizeted the pagod of Otongo, which these people hould to be the god of
darknes (or hell), as the antientes called Pluto. It standes on the
topp of a hill which overlooketh all Edo, and the idoll (or picture)
of Otongo is made in forme lyke a devill, with a hooked nose and feete
lyke a griffon, and riding upon a wild boare. He was painted after
severall formes, but allwais monted upon a wild boare, which the
people say was his blason or armes. And for that entent there is a
greate wild boare alive kept in a cage (or frank) at the foote of the
hill, which I saw at my entrance. And there goeth an upright peare of
[s]ton staie[r]s of 69 stepps, of a lardg breadth, leading directly up
to the pagod; but an easier way is to goe compas about the hill. There
was many people went to vizet that place, and their use is to goe 3
tymes rownd about the pagod mumbling out serten prayers. This I marked
of dyvers.

From thence we went to an other pagod, where the eldest sonne of           88
Ogosho Samma (a valient man) lyeth bured in a stately monument. This
pagod is the seate of the greate or high bushopp of Japon, next after
the _deyre_. His people used us very kyndly, and opened the dores of
the monument, and let us enter in, and opened the secret place where
the idoll of the dececed was placed, whereat all the Japons fell
prostrate and adored it. And from thence they led us into the bushops
chappell or oratory, all sett out with idolls and lamps, nether more
nor lesse then in the papist churches, before which idolls the Japons
did likewais fall downe and worship. This pagod (or monestery) was
erected to the honor of Amida, a greate saint of China, equaled with
Shacca. And I gave an _ichebo_ to them which shewed us these matters,
and so retorned hom.

_October 25._--Fongo Dono, the ould admerall, sent me a present of
frute with a letter from his manor howse, 17 leagues hence.

Capt. Adames was all day at Cort to get our dispach; but had nothing
from the Councell but a nod and smiling countenance.

_October 26._--Mr. Nealson did but ask Capt. Adames for 10 shire maps
without frames, which per his acco. he hath resting in his handes; but
he fell into such a chafe about that matter, telling them which were
about hym, in the Japon tong, that this was not the first tyme we had
charged hym with falce accomptes and after reconynges. Truly I was
ashamed to heare hym in such a humor; yet, after, yt seemed he
recanted, for he came to me and asked me yf I know of any such matter.
And I answerd hym, it apered by Mr. Eatons accompt that he had them,
wherof I know yow (_sic_) have a coppie under his owne hand. So he
went away, and said nothing to the contrary.

Matabio Oye Dono, our host of Oisa,[53] sent me a letter with a
present of 2 greate fyshes, to know whether I were in health or no,        89
for that I was sick in his howse, and not heard any news whether I
were recoverd or noe. He sent this man 16 leagues with this present
only to see how I did. So I gave his man an _ichebo_ of gould to pay
for his horshier and wrot a letter to his master.

We went this day to vizet a greate temple of Yemia Fachman, the god of
war, with an other god, as they take it, joyned with hym, which every
18th day of eache moone the people goe on pilgremage to offer to the
shrines; and this was the 18th day, which made me the more willing to
goe to see it being accomplished, with Capt. Adames, Mr. Nealson, and
others. And I doe verely thinke there were above 100,000 people, men,
women, and children, which went this day upon devotion to that place,
and in many places in the way were comodies (or plaies) to be seene,
and other showes; and before the temple the sorserars or witches stood
dansing, with knottes or bunches of hawcks belles made fast to sticks,
which they held in their hands, mumbling over sertayne prayers. But
that which I tooke most note of was of the liberaletie and devotion of
these heathen people, whoe thronged into the pagod in multetudes, one
after an other, to cast money into a littell chapell before the
idalles, most parte, or rather all which I could see, being _gins_ or
bras money, whereof 100 of them may vallie som 10_d._ str., and are
about the bignes of a 3_d._ English money; which coyne (or brasse
money) they cast in by handfulles, and then came out of the temple,
delivered a writing to one that sat within the dore, who piled them
one on the top of the other. And so the pilgrams turned on the left
hand of the entry of the pagod, and in a gallery went 3 tymes about
it, and soe departed away. There was many 100 of gentellmen which went
on horsback to doe these devotions in the forme as afforsaid.

And soe, as we retorned, we went into a _vento_[54] or tavarne, where      90
we dyned of presentes and bankets which were brought us; and gave to
the howse 500 _gins_, and the servantes 100 ditto.

Cacayemon Dono came to vizet me, and tould me many matters, how his
master and all the rest of the Councell were offended against the
Hollanders, etc.

     [53] Oiso.

     [54] Span. _venta_, a roadside inn.

_October 27._--Capt. Adams went to Cort about our busynes, and there
saw Jno. Yoosen, the Hollander, delivering up a present to themperour
and getting out a _goshon_.

Mr. Nealson envited Cacayemon Dono and Torazemon Dono to supper this
night, and had the dansing beares.

This day at 4 clock after nowne an earthquak.

_October 28._--Chauno Shrogero Dono, Emperours factor, sent me a
letter of his retorne to Edo; and I retorned hym answer, desiring his
frendship to procure us Emperours _goshon_ to carry our shiping to
Langasaque.

Capt. Adams went againe to Cort, to gett our dispach, but retorned
only with a nodd from the counsellors, with a smile. Also he
understood that for 3 daies space Jno. Yoosens present is not yet
deliverd, although he tendered it each day. And I had forgotten to
note downe that Caquemon Dono, secretary of Oyen Dono, tould me that
the said Yoosen brought a present to his master, which he asked hym
whether it were stolne goodes or noe, for that, said he, the
Hollanders are now well knowne to be comune theevs, etc.

Also, Capt. Adams being at Cort, Oyen Dono asked hym wherefore he
came; whereunto he answered that he came for the dispach of thenglish
Capt. "Whie," said he, "is he not gon? It is almost a month past since
I thought he had byn gon." This he spoake in hearing of Jno. Yoosen,
and soe went away laughing, for what event I know not, only Capt.
Adames thought it was in mocking ye Hollanders.

_October 29._--Capt. Adames went to castell to have gotten our             91
dispach, but retorned without doing any thing, the Emperour being gon
to looke on them which shott at blank with hand guns or kalivers.

Also he saw Jno. Yoosen, the Hollander, still with his present
unreceaved, attending their pleasures.

Capt. Adames went to Cort to get our dispache, and the Councell gave
hym order to com to them to morow morning, for that they would talke
with hym. The Emperour went this day a fowling, and with his owne
handes kild 5 elkes (or wild swans), which coming out to send them
abroad to his brothers and frendes (after his retorne to his pallace
or castell), he saw Jno. Yoosen stand in a corner with his present,
and asked what he was; and, being knowne, he went away asking whether
he were a Hollander, and yt was answersd hym yea. "Whie," said he, "it
is reported this fellow is much indebted and will not pay his
creditors." Unto which a frend of his answered, it was to the
Hollanders, his cuntremen, and to noe others; wherin his frend lied,
for he oweth to divers others. Yet upon this report his present was
receaved.

_October 31._--I went and vizeted Chawno Shrogero Dono, and desird hym
to be a meanes to get our dispach; and he tould me he would, and for
our going to Langasaque with our shiping, we might doe it yf we would,
as well as to Firando, for that it was all one to this Emperour, soe
we might doe it.

Capt. Adames went to Cort, as the Councell did bid hym, but attended
most parte of the day, and then retorned without geting out our
dispache.

_November 1._--This day we reconed with Yadeo Dono, partner with
Neamon Dono; but much trowble we had with hym, for he would have put
lodghier, incomiendo, and servantes wages to acco. for goodes sould,
and yet have kept all the profit to them selves, over and above the
bare prise left with them, they having, upon my knowledg, sould it for     92
much more. Also he would have put som thinges sould at a lower price
then it was left at, with other unreasonable matters. Soe I referd all
to Capt. Adames to make an end of it, without going to law, where I am
ashewered we should have fownd small right, as I have known per
experience.

_November 2._--Jno. Yoosen came to vizet me, and brought me a present
of sweet meates, enviting me hom to his howse, etc. Yt seemed by his
speeches he was not well pleaced with the Hollanders liberallety
towardes hym, considering the paynes he had taken for them, for which
he hath the ill will of the _Tono_ of Firando and divers others.

Capt. Adames went to Cort to get our dispache, but themperour was gon
out a hawking and the Councell a feasting; soe nothing was donne.

_November 3._--I receved three letters per expres, viz.:--1 from Ed.
Sayer and Jno. Osterwick, dated in Firando, 2th October; 1 from Capt.
Whaw, China Capt., at Langasaque; 1 from Jno. _jurebasso_ at
Firando--all to sett out 2 _goshons_ for Chinas, yf I can, one for
Tonkin, and other for Taccasanga.

Capt. Adames went to Cort to get our dispach, but retorned without
doing anything. Only Oyen Dono asked hym whether I were gon or no.
Unto whome he answerd, how I could goe without lycence of themperour.
So he tould hym I did well, and that we should forthwith be dispached.

There was 3 Japons of Langasaque with presentes to get out _goshons_
for Cochinchina; but they and their presentes were sent away without
any answer, but that they might com an other tyme, viz. Capt.
Barnardo, Cutarro or Gotarro, Manuel Gonzalves man.

_November 4._--I went to Oyen Dono, accompanid with Capt. Adams and
Mr. Nealson, and by good fortune met hym in the street at his owne         93
dore, desyring his Lordshipp to get us our dispach from themperour,
which he promised to procure forthwith, being ashamed (as he said) we
staid soe longe, and with all tellinge me he was beholden to me.

_November 5._--Yisternight at 10 a clock was an earthquake, which for
a good while shooke very much.

Capt. Adames went to Cort to get our dispache, and was answerd we
should be dispached to morow. The Japons presentes, which came for
_goshons_, were receved.

_November 6._--The Emperour sent me 20 silk _keremons_ (or coates) for
a present, wherof I gave 2 to Capt. Adames, 2 to Mr. Nealson, and 1 to
our host of Miaco, Magazemon Dono.

_November 7._--I forgot to note downe that there was a comett (or
blasing star) which hath appeared this 5 or 6 daies som hower before
day, easterly, a littell to the southwards; but it is so neare the
sunne that we could see nothing but the teale, yt being of a hudg
leangth, and doth, by littell and littell, draw to the westward,
sotherly.

Also this day I went and took my leave of all the lordes of the
Councell, but spoake with none but Oyen Dono.

And, as we retorned, about 10 a clock, hapned a greate earthquake,
which caused many people to run out of their howses. And about the
lyke hower the night following hapned an other, this cuntrey being
much subject to them. And that which is comunely marked, they allwais
hapen at a hie water (or full sea); so it is thought it chanseth per
reazon is much wind blowen into hollow caves under grownd at a loe
water, and the sea flowing in after, and stoping the passage out,
causeth these earthquakes, to fynd passage or vent for the wind shut
up.

_November 8._--We dyned at King of Firandos brothers, where we were
kindly entertayned, and I carid him a _barso_ of wyne and a fresh
salmon for a present.

The people in this place did talke much about this comett seene, that      94
it did prognosticate som greate matter of warr, and many did ask me
whether such matters did happen in our cuntrey, and whether I knew
what it did meane or would ensue therof; unto which I answerd that
such many tymes have byn seene in our partes of the world, but the
meanyng therof God did know and not I.

_November 9._--Capt. Adams was sent for to Cort about our _goshon_ of
last yeare, to know what junk it went in to Cochinchina, and, as it is
thought, Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., hath deceaved me, and
delivered my _goshon_ to Seme Dono at Firando and served his turne in
his junck, which now is com out. These matters are com to light per
meanes of seeking out the truth of sturrs which happened in
Cochinchina with Japons against Chinas, whereof the King of
Cochinchina advized themperour of their unrulynesse; soe that it is
thought noe _goshons_ will be geven out for that place this yeare.

The comet apered this mornynge greater then any tyme before.

_November 10._--I went to Chawna Shogero Dono this morning to desire
hym to get out our _goshon_, which he promised me he would, and desird
to buy som corall of me, yf I had any. Soe I sent hym that which I
had, out of which he took 9 _mas_ 4 _condrin_ wight, and would have
sent me money for it; but I gave it hym.

Towardes night Torazemon Dono and an other gentellman came to vizet me
from King of Firando, unto whome I made knowne how Semy Dono had used
me about my _goshon_, which was thoccation I was staied heare soe long
tyme without my dispach from themperour.

_November 11._--I went and tooke leave of King of Firando, I being
ready to retorne to morrow for Miaco, and fownd him very weake and
sick; yet he gave me very kind entertaynment, and wrott letters (as he
tould me) to his brother and Semy Dono, to pay me the rest of money        95
he oweth to the Company and to doe me justice against Gorezano and all
others.

And before night Torazemon Dono and            wrot me a joynt letter
to deliver them my _goshon_ for use of Semi Dono; which I denyed, and
wrot them answer therof.

_November 12._--I went to Cawno Shogero Dono about the report geven
out of selling my _goshon_, and he tould me that the capt. of Semi
Donos junck is com up and witnesseth that Semi Dono sould hym my
_goshon_ for 300 _taies_; so that, yf the matter should com in
question before the Emperour, it would cost som men their lives. Yet,
for his parte, he would doe the best he could to amend all, and said
it was better I stayd here 2 or 3 daies to se all ended, for, yf I
went away, nothing would be donne.

_November 13._--The comet doth contynew still till this day, drawing
towardes W. southerly.

About 10 a clock at night a fyer began in the north parte of the citty
of Edo; but it was calme wether; otherwais much hurt had byn donne.
Yet ther were a few howses of pristes (or _boses_) servantes with 5
pagon temples burned in 3 divers places a greate distance one from an
other, many merchantes howses and tradesmens howses betwixt, and yet
it passed over all them without doing harme, and only burned downe the
other, as aforsaid; which many esteeme a handy work of God.

_November 14._--I forgot to note downe how the night past, when the
fire was neare to the King of Firandos howse and Cakayemon Donos, I
sent 8 or 10 men to have holpen them, yf need required; but the
streetes were so stopped that non could passe but one as a messenger,
to tell them of my good meanyng, which they took in good part.

_November 15._--There was presentes geven to Andrea and Maddalyna, his
wife, Mrs. Adams sister, in repect they had sent us presentes of 2         96
_barsos_ wyne, frute, and a fresh salmon, and came from Orengaua, 2
daies journey, to vizet us, viz. 1 peece velvett, 1 pece damask, and 5
_mas_ wight corall.

Mr. Nealson fell sick on a sudden of a fever with a bloody flux, in
greate extremety; so we sent for one of kinges chirurgions, to take
his councell, Mr. Nealson being very ernest to be lett blood; but he
councelled the contrary, saying it was nothing but an extreme cold he
had taken which drove hym into this excesse or fever, which, out of
dowbt, was his syting in his shert and a gowne 2 or 3 howrs together
on the topp of the howse, to look at the fyre when the pagods were
burned 2 nightes past.

_November 16._--Yisternight about 10 a clock was an other fyre.

_November 17._--We went to see the Emperours eldest brothers howse,
called Shrongo Samma, being envited to doe it per the ould Emperours
cook, who sent me a present at Shrongo and came hither and vizeted me
2 or 3 tymes since with presentes, besides this frenship. So I sent
hym a peece of damask for a present.

This howse we saw cost the workmanshipp, besides the tymber and all
other stuffe, 34000 bars of Oban gould at 13_l._ 10_s._ str. per bar.
And his 2 yonger brothers have made 2 other howses adjoynying unto yt,
not much inferior to the others. And it is to be considered that all
these buildinges are of tymber, covering and all, but soe guilded over
with gould, both within and without, that it sheweth most gloriouse to
the eye, but endureth but 20 or 30 yeares, and then build an other
new; which they accompt a greate glory and take it a base thing to
dwell in a howse builded by his predecessors.

Capt. Adames went to Court againe to get our dispach, but did nothing.
Soe he talked with Chawno Shogero Dono about my departure from hence
to morrow, I having busynes at Miaco and else where, and that Capt.        97
Adames, havyng busynes to stay heare 4 or 5 daies after me, might
bring it with hym.

_November 18._--We departed from Edo this day, after nowne, and gave
presentes as followeth:--To Capt. Adames 2 _tatta_ black cloth, and
one peece damask; and to Mrs. Adames 1 peece cushen velvett, 1 peece
damaske, and 5 _mas_ wight corall; and to Mrs. Adames sonne Josephe 1
pec. velvet; and to his doughter Susanna 1 pec. damask; and to his
wives mother 1 pec. damask; and to Tome Dono, _jurebasso_, 1 pec.
taffety; and to Jacobe Dono, his clark, 1 pec. taffety. And geven to
servantes in house 2800 _gins_; and paid for our diet 160 _tais_.

And so we went to bed to Sheningaua, 2 leagues from Edo; and paid
charges, supper and breckfast, 4: 1: 6, and to servantes 400 _gins_.

_November 19._--An hower before day we saw an other comet (or blasing
starr) rising just east, in the constellation of Scorpio. It is a
mighty comet, and, in my opinion, bigger then that which was seene
when Sebastian, King of Portingall, was slayne in Barberry.[55]

And paid for a colation at Caningaua[56] 400 _gins_.

And for dyner at Todska[57] 1000 _gins_.

And for ferrying over water 300 _gins_.

And so we went to bed to Oyse;[58] and paid for supper and breakfast 2
_ichebos_, and to servantes 300 _gins_.

     [55] Slain in battle in Marocco, 4th August, 1578.

     [56] Kanagawa.

     [57] Totska.

     [58] Oiso.

_November 20._--We broke fast at Wodowra,[59] and paid 1000 _gins_.
And dyned at Facony,[60] and paid 1000 _gins_. And la all night at
Mishma;[61] and paid for supper and breakfast 3: 8: 0, and to
servantes 400 _gins_.

     [59] Odawara.

     [60] Hakone.

     [61] Mishima.

_November 21._--We went to dyner to Yoishwarra,[62] 1000 _gins_; and
to supper to Yegery,[63] and paid 3: 0: 7, and to servantes 200 _gins_.    98
And paid at passag at Fagicaw[64] 300 _gins_.

The first comet was not seene after this night.

     [62] Yoshiwara.

     [63] Ejiri.

     [64] Fujikawa.

_November 22._--We dyned at Shrongo;[65] and paid 2: 6: 0, and to the
servantes 200 _cash_.

And soe we went to supper to Fugida;[66] and paid to the howse night
and morning 3: 2: 5, being in 2 _ichebos_, and to servantes 300 _gins_.

     [65] Suruga.

     [66] Fujieta.

_November 23._--We dyned at Nisakay;[67] and paid 1 _ichebo_, and to
servantes 200 _gins_.

And went to supper to Meetsque,[68] and paid for night and mornyng
diet 2 _ichebos_ and 500 _gins_, and to servantes 300 _gins_.

     [67] Missaka.

     [68] Mitske.

_November 24._--We went to dyner this day Famma Mattes,[69] where, Mr.
Nealson being sick, we staid the rest of the day, and paid for dyner,
breckfast, and supper 4 _ichebos_ 200 _gins_; and for passage at a
river 600 _gins_; and to _rockshakes_ to cary Mr. Nealson 300 _gins_.

     [69] Hamamatsu.

_November 25._--We dyned at Arra,[70] and paid 1 _ichebo_ and 1
[hundred ?] _gins_; and for passage at a river 500 _gins_; and to
_rockshakes_ to cary Mr. Nealson 1000 _gins_ or _ichebo_.

And so we went to supper to Ushinda,[71] and paid evenyng and mornyng
2 _ichebos_; and to servantes 300 _cash_ or _gins_; and 1 _ichebo_ for
5 cutt _tattams_ spoiled per our people.

The 5 _tattams_ afforsaid were cut by Co John and 2 other knaves, as
we went up, unknowne to me till Capt. Adames had receved a letter
therof.

     [70] Arai.

     [71] Yoshida.

_November 26._--We dyned this day at Acca Sackey;[72] and paid 1
_ichebo_, with 100 _gins_ to the servantes.

And went to supper to Occa Sackey;[73] and paid 2 _ichebos_ and 500
_gins_, and to servantes 300 _gins_.

This day we mett the _Dyres_ women going towardes Edo to fetch one of      99
themperours doughters to be married to the _Daire_.

     [72] Akasawa.

     [73] Okazaki.

_November 27._--We went to dyner to Mia,[74] and paid 1 _ichebo_ and
400 _gins_ to howse and servantes; and passed from Mia to Quano[75]
per water; paid barkhier 1 _ichebo_ 920 _gins_.

And paid for diet at Quano, night and morning, 2 _ichebos_ 400 _gins_
to howse and servants.

And to our ould host for his pains 1 _ichebo_, and to an other man
which brought a present 6 _mas_ 8 _condrin_; they taking paynes to goe
to the King of Quanno, to whome I ment to have geven a present for his
kyndnes as we passed towardes Edo, but he was not within; so his
secretary exskewsed the receving thereof, with many kynd wordes that
he would mak it known to his master. But there was 5 musk cods geven
the Admerall, borowed of Richard King.

And in the mornyng, as we were going out of the towne, the street
being full of hackneymen and horses, they would not make me way to
passe, but fell a quareling with my _neremoners_, and offred me greate
abuse, som of the townsmen taking their partes. But, when they saw me
about to goe to the _tono_ to complaine, they made frendes to speak
unto me, and asked me forgivnes on their knees: they being in danger
of lyfe, yf I complained.

     [74] Miya.

     [75] Kuwana.

_November 28._--We dyned at Ishaquese,[76] and paid 1 _ichebo_ 200
_gins_; and went to supper to Sheque,[77] and spent night and morning
diet 2 _ichebos_ and 500 _gins_, and to servantes 300 _gins_.

     [76] Ishiyakushi.

     [77] Seki.

_November 29._--We went to dyner to Chuchamy,[78] and paid 1 _ichebo_
and 400 _gins_ for diet and servantes. And to supper to Ishebe;[79]
and paid for dyet 2 _ichebos_ and 200 _gins_, and to servantes 300
_gins_.

     [78] Tsuchiyama.

     [79] Ishibe.

_November 30._--In passing by Cousattes,[80] our host sent his sonne      100
to desyre us to enter into his howse, and made us a banket. Soe I gave
hym an _ichebo_, and 100 _gins_ to servantes. And at Setto,[81] 2
leagues short of Oates, our host Magamon Dono had provided a banket
for us. And so we dyned at Oates,[82] and paid 1 _ichebo_ and 200
_gins_ to the howse, and 300 _gins_ to the servantes; and betwixt
Oattes and Miaco Skengoro Dono and Makey Dono mett us in 2 severall
places with bankettes.

Soe this night we arived at Miaco, haveing made 10 leagues this day.

     [80] Kusatsu.

     [81] Zeze.

     [82] Otsu.

_December 2._--We were envited to Cuemon Donos sonne to dyner, where
we had very niggardly fare for our selves and worse for our servantes.
This fello is Grubstretes sonne, and worse then the father, and that
needes not.

_December 3._--Our hosts kinsman, dwelling at Oates, brought me 5
salted cod fish and Mr. Nealson 3 for a present. He mett us at a towne
beyond Oates, 2 leagues, with a banket at our retorne from Edo, and
with an other as we went.

_December 4._--I bought and paid for my selfe, viz.:--

  3 duble womens gerdelles, cost               03  1  0
  3 duble wo. gerdelles, cost                  04  2  0
  1 duble gerdell ditto, cost                  02  4  0
  Watty of silke for a _keremon_               00  8  0
  1 halfe peece ben silk to lyne a _keremon_   04  1  0
                                              ---------
                                               14  6  0

And we bought 10 bundelles writing paper, cost 8 _tais_.

_December 5._--We were envited to dyner to Mackey Dono and had kynd
entertaynment. And he gave me a pike for a present.

And there were presentes geven to Shebe Dono, Grubstreetes sonne; and
to Magamon Donos kinsman at Otes.

And I paid our hostis for embradoring and making Matingas _keremon_ a     101
bar Coban, 6: 4: 2.

_December 6._--Our host of Miacos brother in law envited us to dyner
to a place of pleasure without the cittie, where the dansing beares
were, with a greate feste. And there came an antick dance of saters or
wild men of other Japons, unto whome I gave 1000 _gins_, and a bar of
plate to goodman of howse, containing 4: 3: 0. Soe the dansing beares
were sent home after us.

_December 7._--Giffio Dono delivered us upon his master Tozayemon
Donos accompt, as not being sould, viz.:--

    36 Muscovie or Russia hides.
    2 peeces stamet bayes, containing 48-1/2 _tattamis_.
    1 remnent black bays,      "      22       "
    1 remnent strawculler bais "      20-3/4   "
  all brod cloth:
    No. 013 brodcloth strawculler, containing 07-6/8 _tattamis_.
    No. 005 ditto strawculler, containing 07-3/4 _tattamis_.
    No. 330 murey, containing 07-1/12 _tattamis_.
    No. 204 murey      "      07-11/12   "
    No. 059 popinge    "      07-15/16   "
    No. 511 popinge    "      06-3/4     "
    No. 463 sadd blew  "      06-1/2     "
    And 2 _tatta._ strawculler, no. unknowne.

Our hostis sent me a present, viz. 1 _keremon_ for a woman, 2 peare
_segdas_ or womans shews, 7 codd fish called in Japon _tarra_. And she
sent Mr. Nealson the lyke, with 5 codd fish.

And the host of the howse where we hadd the banket brought me a
present of eating stuff in 3 boxes. And Cude Dono of Firando brought
me a _barso_ of wine and a banket, _nifon catange_.

I sould Skengero Dono rest of my corall, containing 5 _ta._ 4 _mas_,
for 20 _taies_.

_December 8._--We went this night to supper to Fushamy, and gave
presentes to Magamon Dono, our host of Miaco; to Skengero Dono, his
son; and to our hostis. And I gave her littell doughter an _ichebo_ of
gold.

And there was paid out for diett 40 _tais_, and to the servantes in       102
howse 3000 _gins_.

_December 9._--We went from Fushamy to Osakay this morning, and gave
presentes: to our host 2 _tatta_ black bayes; and to his wife one
peece ordenary taffety; to his doughter a gerdell, cost 7 _mas_; to
Ric. Cocks, his sonne, a coate, a gerdell, and shews, cost 2: 3: 0; to
Wickham, his sonne, a gerdell and shews, cost 0: 5: 0. And to
servantes in howse 1000 _gins_, and for dyett 10 _tais_.

And I gave a bar plate to Maky Donos sonne, containing 4 _tais_, he
bringing hym to me to geve hym the name of Richard Cocks.

I gave also 1 _tay_ to Mr. Nealsons boyes syster; and 2 _ichebos_ to 2
dansing beares which followd us to Fraccata.

_December 10._--I forgott to note downe, the 7th day of this month,
after goodes receved of Giffio Dono, that there wanted or rested yet
to rec. for his master Toz. Do. acco. goodes left with him.

  No. 4275, 2 halfe brod cloth strawculler, containing 14-13/32 _tatta._
  No. 009, 1 halfe     "         "             "       08-7/65     "
  No. 021, 1 halfe     "         "             "       08-1/8      "
  More bayes black wantes                              03          "
  And bayes straw                                      06          "
  And in money due per salles                         150        6    6
  And lent hym at Firando                             010        0    0
                                                      -----------------
                                                      160        6    6

_December 11._--Capt. Adams arived at Osakay, but brought not the
_goshon_ with hym, but left his man to bring it after, non yet being
geven out per meanes of the brute betwixt the Japons and Chinas at
Cochinchina.

_December 14._--Tome Dono the _jurebasso_ retornd to Miaco with his
kinsman, and had geven them for horshier 4 _tais_ plate bars.

_December 15._--We sould Maky Dono, in truck of _maky_ ware, viz.:--

  1 brod cloth, No. 121, hayrculler, containing 7-17/25 _tat._  096 0 0   103
  1 brd. cloth, No. 286, cynemond,      "       6         "     072 0 0
  1 brd. cloth, No. 129, strawculler,   "       8         "     084 0 0
  Stamet bayes 12 _tatta._ at vj _tay tat._                     072 0 0
                                                                -------
                                                                324 0 0
                                                                -------

For which he is to deliver me, upon my owne accompt, within 5 months
after date hereof, in _maky_ ware, viz.:--

  020 scritorios, according to measure, at 11 _tas._            220 0 0
  100 combcases, at 5-1/2 _mas._ peece is                       055 0 0
  002 beetell boxes for King Syam, at 15 _tais_ pec.            030 0 0
  The rest being 19 _tais_ in other ware or money               019 0 0
                                                                -------
                                                                324 0 0
                                                                -------

Mr. Eatons littell doughter Helena came from Sackay to vizet me, and
brought me a banket for a present, Japon fation, brought per her
nurce, the mother being sick. And I sent her mother, by her, a bar
plate, and gave the nurce 4 _mas_ small plate.

And Cuemon Dono, Grubstreet, our host, gave me a present: 1 sleeping
silk _kerremon_, 5 codfishes, 5 bundells sea weed drid, 2 _barsos_ of
wyne, 1 _barso_ of vinegar; and to Mr. Nealson 1 silk _catabra_.

_December 16._--This day we went to Sakay to dyner, to meet Tozayemon
Dono, our host, whoe I am enformed is newly arived from Firando, and I
would cleare acco. with hym.

And, being at Sackay, I bought for Helena, Mr. Eatons child, these
thinges following, viz.:--

  2 silk _kerremons_, at 2 _tais_ peece is                4  0  0
  2 peare _tabis_, at 9 _condrins_ peece                  0  1  8
  2 gerdelles in 1 peece, cost                            0  3  5
  2 pere shew stringes, cost                              0  1  0
                                                          -------
                                                          4  6  3
                                                          -------

_December 17._--I bought this day                                         104

  2 _keremons_, outside silk and inside lynen, cost       2  5  0
  1 _kerymon_, all silk, cost                             2  0  0

for my boy Larrance.

  2 black _kerremons_ for women, of silk                  5  2  0

Also I paid for a scritorio with brass garneture 1: 4: 0.

_December 18._--We retorned to Osakay; and paid for our diet and other
bankettes 15: 0: 0, and to servantes 2: 1: 0.

Ther was 3 theevs taken at Osakay and put to deth, being of the
consort of 100 roages sworne to robb and spoile all they could, and
had a head or master over them. So ther is much looking out after the
rest; and were discoverd per a woman.

_December 19._--I rec. a _cubo_ (or womans box) from Maky Dono, cost
15 _mas_, which I sent hym by his man; and wrott hym a letter to make
me 10 chirurgions boxes and 10 salvatoris to them, _maky_ ware.

_December 20._--Yechere Dono, _alius_ Cynemon Dono, brought me a
present of 2 barrilles of wyne. And I bought for Woman Dono:--

  1 _kerremon_, cost                                        5   0   0
  More, for silk watto to put into it                       0   8   0
  More, 1 gerdell, cost                                     0   7   0
  More, 2 peare _tabis_, cost                               0   3   7
  More, 2 peare stringes for them, cost                     0   1   3
  And geven her in money to buy oyle 1 bar plate            2   5   0
                                                            ---------
                                                            9   5   0
                                                            ---------

Susannas uncle sent me a letter from Sakay with 2 pewter bottelles for
a present.

_December 21._--This day at nowne we sett forwardes towardes Firando,
and gave out presentes to Cuemon Dono, host at Osakay, to his wife,
Luisa Dono, and to their sonne. And for our diet in plate bars 65: 0: 0.
And 1 bar plate to Gifio Dono of Sakay for riding up and downe about      105
busynes.

And there was 2 _ta._ 4 _ma._ paid per Mr. Nealson for a barke to
carry us aboard.

And our hostes sonne and other frendes, with Capt. Adams, accompanid
us to Dembo, 2 leagues from Osakay, where we road at an ancor all
night, the wind being contrary.

_December 22._--Cuemon Dono, _alius_ Grubstreet, our host, came aboard
our bark within night with a banket. And I wrot a letter to Capt.
Adams of our stay this day per meanes of contrary wynd and tide. Unto
which he retorned answer, and sent me 50 _muchos_ (or loves of bread).

_December 23._--We set forward from Dembo, or rather Incobe, at Osakay
this mornyng, passing the bar of Osakay, and arived at Fiugo[83] at
nowne. The wind being contrary, we staid at an ancor all night, having
mad 10 leagues this day.

After this night, the comett, or blasing starr, was seene noe more,
and ended under the 3d starr in Chorls wayne or Ursa maior.

     [83] Hôgo.

_December 24._--We tarryed all day and night at Fiungo.

_December 25._--We gave rice and fish to all our barkmen to dyner this
day, with a _barso_ of wine, in respect of Christmas Day.

And meeting with a man of Yechero Donos, I wrot a letter to Capt.
Adames of our puting into this place per meanes of contrary wind, and
that yf he understood Tozsayemon Dono were arived at Sackay, to send
me a letter expres per a _tento_, to thend that yf the wind remeaned
contrary, I might put back to Sackay, or else send Mr. Nealson, to
look out for the 1000 _taies_.

_December 27._--We departed from Fiungo, and paid to the host 4: 0: 0,
and to his littell sonne 0: 3: 1, and to servantes 7: 1: 0.

Soe we made 40 leagues this day and night, and came to an ancor at        106
Shemuts,[84] 10 leages short of Bingana Tomo.

     [84] Shimotsai.

_December 28._--The wind being contrary, we staid here all day and
night following; and, the wether being cold, we had a fyre made with a
few charcoll in my chamber, in a place of purpose for such occation,
dawbed about with clea. But it seemeth it was decayed, for, after I
was in bedd, it took fyre beloe (not being seene before). And had not
som of our servantes byn up late, I had byn burned in my chamber, in
such a place that I could not have gotten out. For the fyre began
within 2 foote of the place I did lie in upon the mattes; and, when
they came in and fownd it, yt flamed up brest hie, but, God be
thanked, was sowne quenched without hurt.

_December 29._--The _tono_ or king of this place is a yong man called
Mats Dayre Cunay Dono, of som 24 years ould; the cuntrey called
Bigen[85] Sshmutsa; his revenews esteemed at (as our host his vassall
tould me),           [86] _mangocos_ per anno. He is now at Edo per
themperours comandment; and som 20 yeares past his father builded a
greate castell or fortresse in this place, which was pulled downe 4
yeares past, when all (or the most parte of) the fortresses in Japon
were dismantelled and utterly ruenated. The ruens of this are to be
seene very large at my being heare.

We departed from Shemuttes, and arived at Bingana Tomo within night,
having made 10 leagues.

Sent a bark to Miwarry[87] to buy 30 _barsos morofack_ to carry to
Firando.

     [85] Bizen.

     [86] Blank in MS.

     [87] Mihara, in Bingo.

_December 30._--I bought and paid for 6 peare _shegdas_, or womans
shews, 2 _mas_.

_December 31._--The wind being contrary, we could not departe; but
receved 14 barilles _morofack_ from Miwarra, cost 16: 5: 2.

_January 1, 1618/9._--We departed from Bingana Tomo, although the wind    107
were contrary, and paid out for diet 5: 4: 0, for barkhier and a man
to fetch wine from Miwarra 1: 4: 0, to servantes 1: 0: 0.

And we gave to our hostis of Bingana Tomo for a present one salmon and
2 codd fysh, and to her doughter a pikture of Christ and two musk
codds.

Soe we made this day and night following 20 leagues.

_January 2._--Raine and heale per night, a very storme or tuffon. So
we went but 3 leagues this day, and ancored under an iland or rock.

_January 3._--We wayed ancor, and with much adoe gott to an other
iland to a roade, the village called Sua, having made this day 5
leagues, but, wind serving after, we gott to Camyna Seak[88] by break
of day, having made per night 12 leagues.

     [88] Kaminoseki.

_January 4._--We gott this day and night following from Camina Seake
to Chimina Seake[89] by break of day, having mad 37 leagues. But som 8
or 10 leagues short of Shimina Seak our boate ran against a rock in
the water, that it was a woonder she was not split in peeces, but
being a strong new boate shee had noe hurt. God be praised for it.

     [89] Shimonoseki.

_January 5._--Our host at Chimina Seak came abord of us, and brought
me a _barsoe_ of wine and a bundell of drid cuttell fish for a
present, but, the wind being good, we did not stay, but put to sea.

The wind being contrary, we were forced to put back 3 leagues which we
had gotten, and to enter into a port in Faccata called Ashia[90] (or
Asha), where we staid all night, and went ashore; and paid to howse
1: 2: 2, and to servantes 0: 2: 2, and for fresh fish bought to carry
abord. And so we made this day 10 leagues.

     [90] Ashiya.

_January 6._--We departed this mornyng at sunne rising from Ayshia,
and the morow morning, at lyke hower, arived at Langway[91] in            108
Crates, having made per day and night 33 leagues.

I forgott to note downe that the towne of Ashia was sett on fire some
10 daies past by drinking of tobaco, where their were above 400 howses
burned, and 8 of the ruchest men in the towne burned in adventuring
over far to save their monies and goods. Amongest the rest a mynt man
was one of them, whome was noted above all others for a badd covetous
man and one that had gotten his goodes uncontionably.

     [91] Nagoya.

_January 7._--We departed from Languay at sunne rising, and about 1 a
clock were forced by a tempest (or tuffon) of wynd and rayne to put
into a harbor of Firando, called Awoe, 7 leagues short of Firando, the
sea being so overgrowne that we could not keepe it out to gett to
Firando. Soe we made 6 leagues this day.

_January 8._--We arived at Firando this day about nowne, having made 7
leagues this day.

The _tono_ and all the caveleros sent messengers to bid me wellcom
home, and all the neighbours and other frendes came in person to doe
the lyke. And at our passing by the English shipp which the Hollanders
had taken, they shott affe 3 peeces of ordinance to wellcom me, which
I tooke rather in scorne then otherwaies.

_January 9._--I sent presentes as followeth, viz.:--

To Tonomon Samma 2 _barsos morofack_ and 2 salmons.

To Bongo Sama 1 _barso morofack_ and 1 salmon.

To Taccamon Dono the lyke.

To Oyen Dono the lyke.

To Andrea Dittis, China Capt., 2 _barsos morofack_, and 2 salmons,
with one silk _kerremon_ geven me per Emperour; and an other silk
_keremon_ same to his sonne Augustine; and a silke gerdell, a pere
_morofak tabis_ and string, with a perfumed fan to Capt. Chinas wife;
and a box or littell trunk _maky_ ware, and a silverd fanne to his        109
eldest doughter, with a pere _tabis_ and stringes; with an other
silverd fan to his yongest doughter.

To Ed. Sayer a silk _kerremon_ geven me per Emperour.

To Jno. Osterwick the lyke.

To Mr. Wickhams woman a silke gerdell, a perfumed fan, a pere _morofak
tabis_ and stringes; with the lyke to Mr. Eatons and Mr. Sayers women;
and allso to Mr. Nealsons and Mr. Osterwicks women.

And to Jno. Portus, Robert Hawley, and Jno. Cooke, eache of them a
peare of lether buskins; and to each of their women a peare _tabis_
and stringes, with a silverd fanne.

And to Matinga 2 ruch _kerremons_, with 2 gerdelles to them, a womans
box, a box to put gerdelles in, a peare _tabis morofak_ with 2 peare
stringes, and 2 peare small _beaubes_.

And to Susanna a box with a gerdell, a peare of _tabis_ and stringes.

And to Otto, Matingas mad, a gerdell, _tabis_ and stringes.

And to Gynne, littell Otto, and Besse, each one a pere _tabis_ and
stringes.

And to littell Wm. Eaton a gerdell, _tabis_, stringes, and silverd
fan.

And to my boy Larrance, to geve his mother, a gerdell.

Also Yoskes father sent me a pigg for a present.

_January 10._--I understand that in my abcense at Emperours cort that
the Hollanders misused me in speeches, which som frendes hearing
reproved them for it, and they made answer, a t---- for me and them
to. And after, Mr. Sayer and Jno. Portus going along the streete, the
Hollanders cast a cup of wyne in the faces of them. Where upon they
grew into wordes, and fell together per the eares; in which broyle
Jno. Portus broke a Hollanders pate with his dagger. I doe know that
Speck, the Holland Capt., sett them on, otherwais they durst not          110
have donne it. Soe herupon Jno. Osterwick and Jno. Portus went to the
Hollandes howse to know what their meanyng was to use us in such sort,
and withall to tell hym that yf it were by his instigation, to
challeng hym and his second into the feeld to answer Ed. Sayer and
Jno. Portus, or any other the prowdest Hollanders he would apoint, yf
he durst not doe it hym selfe; that they were base people in respect
of thenglish, and I a better man then hym selfe or any Hollander in
these partes. Capt. Speck exskewsed hym selfe, and said it was
unknowne to hym (yet a lie), and soe put them affe. Yet, after, they
did not attempt such matters noe more.

Tozayemon Dono, being now ready to retorne for Sackay, wanteth 400 and
odd _tais_ of the Somo plate lent hym before my going up. And soe I
dowbt he will play the gemeny with us, and that it will not come in
tyme to send it for Cochinchina, as it is ordayned. Yet he sayeth he
will pay duble yf it com not in tyme. We have now no remedy but
patience.

We were envited this day to dynner to Andrea Dittis, the China Capt.,
(all thenglish), where we hadd good cheare. And in the ende he brought
me his littell doughter of an yeare ould, called Ingasha, willing me
to geve her a Christian name, and esteeme her as my doughter. Soe I
gave her the name of Elizabeth. And he gave me a present with her, as
followeth, viz:--

                                                         _ta.  ma.  co._
  2 silver candell stickes, poz.                          30    0    0
  2 silver branches, gouldsmiths work                     02    9    8
  5 peeces grogran, which I esteem at 4 _ta._ peece       20    0    0
  5 peeces cheremis, or silk sipers, estemed at as much   20    0    0
                                                          ------------
                                                          72    9    8
                                                          ------------
  With 2 _barsos_ wyne and 2 fyshes.

Capt. Whow sent me 20 pound sitrons for a present.

_January 11._--Heale and snowe all day, and lyke per night following.     111

Divers caveleros sent me frute and other eatable presents, and came to
bidd me wellcom home.

I cut a peece of green damask, and made 2 _keremons_ of it for Helena,
Mr. Nealsons gerle, and Mr. Wickhams gerle, and lyned them with a
peece Japon taffete. Also I gave Susanna a _keremon_ of them I had of
Tozayemon Dono, and lyned it with a peece redd taffetie.

_January 12._--Cold, frosty, snowie wether, wind northerly, and soe
remayned all day and night following. Soe this is the deepest snowe I
sawe since I came into Japon.

Mr. Sayer and Mr. Osterwick wrot letters to Syam to send in the
Holland junck in my abcense, Capt. Speck assuring them conveance. But
this day he sent them back againe, saying that they fownd them under
Albartus bed, whoe had forgotten them and left them behind hym. But
this is one of Specks tricks, whoe, out of dowbt, had opened them
before. But the worst is, Ed. Sayer and Jno. Osterwick were soe
unadvized that they noted in their letter how I sent 2 others per same
conveance, which I did per a Japon unknowne to the Hollanders, which I
dowbt now will be intercepted: which angereth me not a littell.

_January 14._--This mornyng still cold, snowey wether, with much wind
northerly, and soe remayned all day and the lyke per night following,
with a hard frost.




                 [_Here there is a gap in the MS._]
                                                                          112



_December 5_ (_Shimutsque 21_), 1620.--I receved a letter from Cuemon
Dono, of Nangasaque, that he hath 60 beeves lying by hym, and our men
will not take them, for that they are leane; and therefore he would
have us to take 40 of the best and leave the rest, and would send them
by boate for Firando at his owne charges. But I retorned answer that,
yf his beefes hadd byn fatt and com in tyme, we had took all, and now
hadd taken pork of hym in place thereof, for that I could not meddell
in this matter to keepe leane beevs all winter, having neither
hayestack nor pasture.

_December 6_ (_Shimutsque 22_).--Mr. Wilkyn, a purcers mate of the
_James Royall_, having byn sick of a consumption a long tyme, departed
out of this world this night past, and was buried this day in our
ordenary buriall place. Capt. Pring, Capt. Adames, and many other
accompanied the corps to grave; and Mr. Copland, the preacher, made a
speech out of the chapter read in the buriall.

The King of Firando sent word he was lame of a legg, and therefore
could not goe abord the _James Royall_ to see her, as he desired, and
therfore thanked Capt. Pring for his love, wishing hym a prosperouse
voyage.

Also Capt. Pring, Capt. Adames, Capt. Lennis, with the ij preachers,
[Mr.] Browne, and my selfe, dyned abord the _Bull_, and had 5 peces
ordinance at our departure.

And I deliverd Mr. Robinson five R. of 8 to pay, when in England, to      113
my brother Walter Cocks.

_December 7_ (_Shimutsque 23_).--The _James Royall_ went out to Cochie
roade this day, but, waying ancor too sowne, was put to the northward
of Foynes Iland, and lost an ancor of 27 C. wight; and, yf she had not
quickly let fall an other, had byn in greate danger, the currant
driving her to windward, against the seyles and above 20 boates which
toed her to leeward. Yet, God be praised, the second ancor held and
staid her till tide turned. The Duch sent 4 barks to toe her out, and
I the lyke; and Capt. Spek and others came abord to bidd Capt. Pring
fare well.

_December 8_ (_Shimutsque 24_).--The Duch shippe _Trowe_ went out to
Cochie road this day; and I sent out 4 barkes to helpe to toe her, as
they did the like to the _James Royall_ yistarday.

We bought the howse Oque Dono our overthwart neighbor, for 1 C. x
_tais_, viz. 90 _tais_ to hym selfe, for princepall, and 20 _tais_ to
his wife in respeck our bakers made an oven and baked bread in the
yard, and our maltman made malt and lodged all in the howse this
monson.

Mr. Eaton put to acco. lj _tais_ vj-1/2 _mas_ rec. of Mr. Henry Smith,
purser of _James_, for 2566 lovs bread of flower which should have gon
in the junck _Godspeed_.

_December 9_ (_Shimutsque 25_).--I rec. 3 letters from Nangasaque, viz.
2 from Mr. Chapman, of the 1th and 7th present, and 1 from Mr.
Badworth, of the 1th present, of thinges sent for Firando in 3 barkes,
one of which is cast away, wherin Mr. White of the _Bull_ was.

_December 10_ (_Shimutsque 26_).--I rec. a letter from Gonrok Dono at
Langasaque, per his man Yasimon Dono, to sent price of our lead, and
that he was ready to rec. it. And Capt. Speck rec. another to same
effect. This Yasimon Dono offerd us 3-1/2 _condrins_ for a _cattie_,
which is 3-1/2 _tais_ per _pico_, not the money it cost in England.

And som speeches are geven out that our men above, at Edo, are kept       114
presoners. But I think it is a lie. Yet there weare the like reportes
the other day; which was occation I gave Capt. Pring councell to get
out into Cochie road, and will make as much hast as we can to gett out
the _Moone_ and _Bull_. God send us good luck.

And we sent presentes to the King of Firando and his brother, Tonomon
Samma, and to Semi Dono, as followeth. Capt. Speck, the Duch comander,
Jno. Johnson, and Mr. Leonard for Hollanders, and Capt. Pring, Capt.
Adames, and my selfe for English.

For Figien a Camma, King of Firando:--

  150 _cattis_ white silke, viz. 158 skeanes white, and twisted 17
      bunds., containing 100 _tatt._
  007 _tatta._ stamet brod cloth.
  007 pec. stuff, viz. 2 branch sattin, with rozes, 2 blak sattin,
      with gold, 3 blak, with gold flowers.
  020 pec. redd sais, viz. 10 greate, 10 small.
  020 pec. white saies.
  010 pec. damaskes, greate.
  200 _pico._ of lead.
  003 _pico._ peper, with 3 bagges of damask.

For Tonomon Samma:--

  050 _cattis_ white silke.
  002 _tatta._ stamet broad cloth.
  007 pec. redd sayes.
  007 pec. white sayes.
  007 pec. Canton damasks.
  020 _pico._ lead.
  050 _cattis_ pepper, with a damask bagg.

For Semi Dono:--

  25 _cattis_ white silke.
  02 _tatta._ stamet brod cloth.
  07 pec. redd sayes.
  07 pec. white sayes.
  07 pec. Canton damasks.
  25 _pico._ pepper and 3 china basons.
  10 _pico._ of lead.

_December 11_ (_Shimutsque 27_).--Andrea Dittis, China Capt., retorned    115
this morning from Nangasaque, and tells me he mett Mr. Sayer going
ashore yistarday, as he was coming from thence. He sent Capt. Pring
and me, each of us, a jar of _markasotes_, or sweet bred, and one to
Capt. Adames.

Also I rec. a letter from Mr. Sayer, dated in Nangasaque yistarday,
wherin he writ that one Faccata Soka Dono will lend us 5 or 6000
_tais_ at intrest, yf we will.

This day, at English howse, both we and the Hollanders sett our fermes
to 2 books (one English, thother Duch) containing the presentes geven
the King of Firando, Tonomon Samma his brother, Bongo Samma their
greate uncle, and Semi Dono.

Yazemon Dono of Faccata hath lent us this day two thousand _tais_
plate of barrs at intrest, to pay ij per cento per month, is forty
_tais_ per month.

I wrot a letter to the 2 _bongews_ of Umbra to thank them for
releeving our men cast away in the bark.

And towardes night Bonomon Dono came from Tonomon Samma his master,
and brought a pike and _langenatt_ for presentes to Capt. Pring and
Capt. Adames. And presently after came Semi Dono with 2 Japon guns and
2 _barsos morowfack_ for Capt. Pring and Capt. Adames, and brought a
bankett after Japon fation, to drink with them and take his leave,
because he had no tyme to envite them to dynner.

Also the king sent 3 men to put us in mynd that he hadd ordayned them
serchers, to look out we carid no Japons in our shiping. And I made
answer we ment to carry out non but such we would formerly geve his
Highnesse notis of, but were loth to consent to a new custom to serch
our shipps, never used hertofore, it being against our preveleges
granted us per themperour.

_December 12_ (_Shimutsque 28_).--We supped all at Duch howse, both
Capt. Pring, Capt. Adames, and all the masters of the shipps and          116
merchantes ashore, where we had greate cheare and no skarsety of wyne,
with many guns shott affe for healthes all the night long.

_December 13_ (_Shimutsque 29_).--I went downe to Cochie abord the
_Royall James_ to seale up my letters, Capt. Pring soe desiringe me.
And the Dutch mett us there at supper. And before I departed from
Firando I sent our _jurebasso_ to tell the 3 new serchers apointed
that I made acco. the _Royall James_ would goe out to morow morning
before day, soe that, yf they would vizet her, it were good they went
downe this night. I did it because they should take noe advantage
against me, being lardg tonged felloes as they are.

_December 14_ (_Shiwas 1_).--I delivered all my letters to Capt. Pring
for Bantam and England, viz.:--

1 joynt letter to Mr. Tho. Brockedon and Capt. Augustin Spalding, to
Bantam.

1 privat letter to Capt. Spalding, with 15 _maky_ skritorios to sell
for me.

1 to Mr. Adam Denton in answer of his, and sale of a cloak for hym.

1 to Jno. Beamond, with a _cattan_ from Jno. _jurebasso_.

1 to Right Worll. Company, of shipping arived this yeare.

1 to Sr. Tho. Smith, in answer of recept of 2 of his, with peare
tables.

1 to Mr. Wm. Harrison, treasurer, with a peare _macky_ tables.

1 to Mr. Mouris Abbot, deputie, with a peare pleing tables.

1 to my brother Walter Cocks, with xxiij _ll._ xv _sh._

1 to Mr. Totton.

1 to Christofor Lanman.

1 to Capt. Jno. Saris.

1 to Mr. Jno. Barker.

1 to Andrew Charlton.                                                     117

1 to Tho. Antony.

1 to Sr. Tho. Wilson.

1 to Mrs. Mary Adams.

1 leger expedition from Mr. Robt. Price.

_December 15_ (_Shiwas 2_).--I went downe to Cochie againe, and wrot
these letters for Bantam and England:--

1 to Mr. Brokedon and Mr. Spalding at Bantam.

1 to Mr. Jno. Ferrers at Bantam.

1 to Mr. Tho. Ferrers at London, to pay 9_l._ to my brother Walter
Cocks.

1 to my brother Walter Cocks to receve it for acco. Jno. Ferrers.

_December 16_ (_Shiwas 3_).--Capt. Cleavenger, Mr. Cockram, and the
Hollanders did arive this day from themperours court, with busynes to
their owne content, the lead being put at five _tais_ the _pico_, and
the prize referred to the King of Firando of the padres and friggat.

I rec. these letters from Edo and Miaco, viz.:--

1 from Oyen Dono, themperours secretary, to Capt. Speck and my self
with many good words in it, and how our men were gratiously rec. per
themperour.

1 from Gentero Dono, King of Firandos brother, complementall, that he
is glad of tharivall of soe many English ships this yeare, etc.

[And others.]

And I wrote these letters for England and Bantam, viz.:--

1 to Honble. Company, of arivall of our men from Edo.

1 to Mr. Tho. Brokedon and Mr. Augustin Spalding, to same effect.

1 to Capt. Spalding, with a nest of 5 tronks for Mr. Denton.

1 to Mr. Adam Denton, to same effect.

And I carid Oyen Donos letter to the Duch howse, because it was           118
directed to Capt. Speck as well as unto me, and it emported as much as
I noted before, as also of the recept of the cheane of gould and
presentes sent hym from Honble. Company. And Capt. Speck shewed me an
other letter which came from Codgsque Dono, directed both to hym and
me, and one to same effect as that from Oyen Dono.

_December 17_ (_Shiwas 4_).--The _James Royall_ put to sea out of Cochie
roade this day before nowne with a good wind. God send her a
prosperous voyadge.

_December 18_ (_Shiwas 5_).--I paid unto one of the smiths of the
_Moone_, a Staffordshire man, for a fowling peece, fyve Rialles of
eight in Spanish plate, is xx_s._ str.

And there was brought ashore out of the shipp _Elizabeth_ xvj
canestars of silk, and xv bales black China stuffes, cotton woll, and
3 hhds. of China rootes, all of prize goodes taken in the friggatt.
The China blak stuffes somthing rotten.

And I lent xij R. of 8 to ij Staffordshire men, to pay me 5_s._
per R. of 8 yf they retorne to Japon 6 months hence; yf not, to pay
x_s._ for R. of 8 in England. The name of thone is           Smith,
cook of the _Moone_; the others name is           Asberry, a marrenar
in the _Bull_.

_December 19_ (_Shiwas 6_).--I forgot to note downe how yistarday a
Japon did beate an English man, and hald hym into his howse for 5 R.
8; but Abraham Smart met that Japons man in our howse and put hym into
the stocks, unknown to me. But I let out the Japon, and put Smart into
his roome, although the Japon hadd sett the other into bilbous--I
meane the English man--wherof I complained to Semi Dono, and he caused
thenglishman to be retorned, and bad me chuse whether I would pay the
money to the Japon or no.

Mr. Sayer arived from Nangasaque this day, and brought a letter from
Pheze Dono of 6000 _tais_ plate barrs taken up of a merchant for 4
months at ij per cento per month; also iij M. v C. _tais_ ditto           119
more, taken up of Soka Dono of Faccata at same term and intrest.

_December 20_ (_Shiwas 7_).--Capt. Speck and my selfe sent a letter to
Gonrok Dono to Nangasaque per Mr. Osterwick, Co Jno. our _jurebasso_
accompanyng hym, to deliver the Councells letter to hym from Edo to
take all our lead at 5 _condrins_ the _catty_, and make us ready
payment.

_December 21_ (_Shiwas 8_).--The shipp _Moone_ went out of Firando to
Cochi Roade this day at nowne; and the Hollanders shott affe 5 pec.
ordinance at Duch howse and 5 out of the greate junck; and the _Bull_
shott affe 5 more; and the _Moone_ answered with 9 peces to them, and
gave us 5 at retorninge ashore. The Hollanders sent out 4 barks to
helpe to toe her out, and I 6.

_December 22_ (_Shiwas 9_).--The shipp _Bull_ went out this day, and I
sent 6 boates, and the Hollanders 3, but the sea _bongews_ sent non.

_December 23_ (_Shiwas 10_).--We had a duble councell this day at
English howse, first viz. amongst ourselves, thenglish, Capt. Adames,
Capt. Clevenger, Capt. Lennis, and Mr. Munden, Mr. Cockram, Mr. Eaton,
and my selfe assisting, viz.:--

1. Yt was agreed Mr. Ed. Sayer shall goe merchant in the shipp _Bull_,
and Robt. Hawley and Ric. King and Harry Dodsworth to goe in other
shipping, Duch or English, as shall be thought fitt.

2. Allso that the coates or _kerremons_ geven per themperor should be
prised, it being referred to Mr. Eaton and Mr. Cockram to doe it, and
then to be destributed per the amerall and his councell to whome they
pleased; they being coates of two sortes, one rated at vj _tais_ per
peece, and thother at 4 _tais_ peec.; and they which receve them to be
bound to pay the money in England, yf the Company like not of the
geveing.

The other was a generall councell both of us and Hollanders:--

1. Wherin was sould a cheane of gould, poz. vj _tais_ nyne _mas_,         120
which I Richard Cocks bought for 1 C. x R. of 8, ready paid downe, the
one halfe being deliverd to the English admerall, Capt. Adames, and
the other to Jno. Johnson, the Duch comander. But first there was
xxiij R. of 8 taken out and geven to Capt. Morgan, which he had
formerly disbursed. So rest neate delivered to each one 43-1/2 R. of 8.

2. And in this councell was agreed that the shipp _Swan_ shall goe for
Manillas with the fleete at halfe charges betwixt the Hollanders and
us, I meane betwixt the ij Compans. of England and Holland, they first
to geve in a trew acco. what it coms to.

3. Also it was ordayned that ij English men shall goe in each Duch
shipp, and ij Duch in each English shipp.

4. There was presentes sett downe to be geven to men in Firando.

_December 24_ (_Shiwas 11_).--I gave out my bill for iij M. v C. _tais_
unto Faccata Soka Dono, taken up at intrest for 4 months at 2 per
cento per month, the bill being dated from the 2th of the Japon
_Shiwas_, is 9 daies past. Also certen Miaco men brought 6000 _tais_
more, telling me Feze Dono took it up att same rate for 4 months, but
they desiring a bill of my hand and our lead bownd for payment therof,
with a letter to same effect to Gonrok Dono, I denid it, ofering them
ether to take my bill or my letter, whether they would, or my bill
without mentioning the lead and the letter to mention it. But they
would not, but carid away their money.

_December 25_ (_Shiwas 12_).--We shott affe 8 chambers and 5 peces of
ordinance this morning, it being Christmas Day.

I gave 1 _tay_ to Mall Nubery, the _caboques_ coming to vizet us.

The _Elizabeths_ company mutened, and ment to have stured up the          121
_Palsgraves_ company to the like, but Capt. Cleavenger clapt the
messengers into the bilbos till the admerall determened of it. But a
multetude of the _Elizabeths_ men came to reskew them, and Mr. Browne,
master of the _Palsgrave_, sent them packing with broaken pates and
kept the presoners; for which the muteners sware by flesh and fell
they will kill them. One James Littell, a Scotsman, is verey forward
in the muteny as a turbulent felloe. And Capt. Edmond Lennis, capt. of
the _Elizabeth_, went ashore, not reproving those felloes for it.

These felloes abovsaid in generall demanded in mutenose sort the fift
parte of the merchandiz taken in the friggot, as also for other
matters taken before, aledging Capt. Keeling did the like for priz
goodes taken before. Also it is said Capt. Lennis hath secretly
detayned a cheane of gould taken in the friggot.

_December 26_ (_Shiwas 13_).--We envited the Hollanders to supper this
night in the name of Capt. Adams, admeralls name, as they before
envited us in their comander Capt. Johnsons name; and we made them
cheare to content.

_December 27_ (_Shiwas 14_).--Mr. Osterwick retorned from Nangasaque and
brought answer from Gonrok Dono that it was referd to his discretion
whether he would take our lead at 5 _condrins_ or no; soe he thought
it too deare at that rate and ment to com to an other price.

And one Jacob Littell, a Scotsman, was taken prisoner for writing
idell lynes to make the _Elizabeths_ company to muteny, he being of
that shipps company, and wrot those lynes to the _Palsgraves_ company
to have made them doe the like, but could not effect it per reason of
Capt. Cleavengar and Mr. Browne prevented them. And this Littell,
being taken and sent to Firando to be heard, broake out of the bilboes
and sled (_sic_) we know not whither.

_December 28_ (_Shiwas 15_).--We went (with the Duch) to vizet the king;
and the admerall and vizadmerall gave hym to understand shipps were       122
ready to departe, and therefore came to take leave of hym, which he
accepted of in good parte, and thanked the admerall for the 2
_baricas_ Spanish wine he sent to hym the other day.

We took up vj M. _tais_ plate barrs of Souchio Dono and Cofio Dono of
Miaco at intrest for 4 months, at ij per cento per month.

And I paid the shewmakers for xj peare slippers and shewes 5-1/2 R. of
8 in Spanish money, viz.:--

                                                R. 8.
  3 peare blak slippers for my selfe            2-1/2
  2 pear red slippers for my selfe
  1 peare shewes for Mr. Hely, the soulder      0-1/2
  2 peare shews for Barnardo                    1
  1 peare shews for malt man                    0-1/2
  1 peare shews for the brewer                  0-1/2
  1 peare for Jno. Forster the trumpeter        0-1/2

_December 29_ (_Shiwas 16_).--Capt. Speck came to the English howse to
talke about going to Nangasaque to Gonrok Dono, to settell the price
of the lead. Soe it was agreed Capt. Speck should goe for both partes
to doe his endevour.

And Mr. Eaton rec. xxv _tais_ of Mr. Cockram for 5 peces stuffes, at 5
_tais_ pece, to make aparell for servantes which went to Cort.

_December 30_ (_Shiwas 17_).--Yt was thought fytt and brought in
question by the Hollanders to trym up a China _sampan_[92] to goe with
the fleete, but she was fownd unservesable, and rather thought to
proceade from the Hollanders to protract tyme till Capt. Speck retorne
from Nangasaque, to see yf he can procure license from Gonrok Dono for
men to goe out in their junck for Bantam; yf not, then must they keepe
Hollanders, although they want them in the fleete.

Capt. Speck went this day to Nangasaque about the busynes spetified       123
yisterday, and carid 3 bottells Spanish wine from Hollanders and as
many from us to present to Gonrok Dono.

     [92] _San-pan_: literally, three planks.

_December 31_ (_Shiwas 18_).--I paid threeskore and 3 Rialles of eight,
Spanish money, to Mr. Joseph Cockram upon a peare of gould masse
beades waying 3 _ta._ 7 _ma._ 5 _co._, to sell for hym in his abcense
and make hym what other profitt I can.

And I gave or paid for Susan xvij-1/2 _mas_, viz.:--

                               _ta.  ma.  co._
  For a gerdell                  1    1    0
  For a lyning for coate         0    4    5
  For flowers to dye             0    2    0

_January 1_ (_Shiwas 19_), 1620/1._--I went to Cochie to take my leave of
the admerall and rest of our frendes, and remeaned theare all night.

_January 2_ (_Shiwas 20_).--There was a sea councell held this day abord
the shipp _Moone_, admerall, both of the English and Duch, where it
was debated what course they ment to take when they went out, being
now ready to sett seale. And I gave all the cheefe comanders in our 4
shipps each one a remembrance of my opinion tuching this pretended
voyage for Manillias, and that I understood there is xxiiij China
junckes bound this yeare for Manillias, and the course they ment to
take as apereth per coopie of that remembrance dated in Firando
yistarday, being the 1th of January 1620, curant.

And I carid a butt of rack of pie abord thadmerall to parte it with
thother shipps in respect of a butt of Spanish wine geaven into the
factory. And I sent xx. jarrs bisket abord the _Moone_.

_January 3_ (_Shiwas 21_).--This morning betymes all our fleete, both
English and Hollands, being 9 seale, put to sea towardes the
Manillias. God send them good speed.

And Capt. Speck retorned from Nangasaque, but did nothing with Gonrok     124
Dono, for he will not take our lead at 5 _tais pico_, although the
Emperors councell tould our men at Edo they hadd wrott hym to doe it.

_January 4_ (_Shiwas 22_).--I went to the Duch howse to see the laying
out of the presentes to geve to noblemen, as per councell ordayned.
And at that instant the King of Firando departed towards Miaco and soe
for Edo, the Hollanders shooting affe store of chambers and ordinance.
And I went after in a bark with Capt. Speck, and we carid hym 3 jarrs
concerves, i C. vj. _cattis_ grose tare, wherof 34 _cattis_ grosse
weare of myne, rest of Hollanders. And Unagense Dono accompanying hym,
we gave hym a present of 4 pec. red says and 4 pec. cheremis and 4-1/2
_cattis_ silk.

And I sent Richard Hudson to Cochie to take notis of thinges left in
our howses, and delivered them to Shinso Dono, greate Domingos father,
and weare as followeth, viz.:--

  817 long shething plankes.
  136 shorte ditto.
  005 square tymbers.
  002 ladders.
  006 dores for gedonges, and 1 dore lost out of littell howse.
  006 windoes to shutt.
  002 shipp boates or skiffes, without ores.

And for the mattes, our marreners brutishly tore and cutt them in
peeces, and carid such part they thought good away with them, in spite
of them I lefte to keepe them, and would have wrong out staples and
all iron work out of windoes and dores.

And Cuemon Dono, our fleshman at Nangasaque, retorned this day
thither, and would not end accomptes with me, except I would alow hym
i C. _taies_ plate of barrs put to acco. and paid hym per Mr. Ed.
Sayer, as apereth per Cuemons owne hand writing; yet he will not alow
thereof, but went away in a fustian fume.

_January 5_ (_Shiwas 23_).--I paid the Japon glover for a peare pomps ij
_mas_ small plate.

And we went with the Hollanders and carid presents this day to Bongo      125
Dono, Sangero Dono, Stremon Dono, Nagen or Unagense Dono, Cacamon
Dono, Oyen Dono, Jeamon Dono, Jensamon Dono, Taccomon Dono, Weamon
Dono.[93]

     [93] The presents comprised sayes, Canton damask, silk, cheremis,
     Lankin silk, and lead.

_January 6_ (_Shiwas 24_).--Capt. Speck, Capt. Leonard, Albartus, and
Mattias envited themselves to our _fro_ and supped at English howse.

_January 7_ (_Shiwas 25_).--We envited our neighbours to supper on
Tewsday next, which provided thinges for our shipping, with the
gunfounders, master carpenters, and smiths.

_January 9_ (_Shiwas 27_).--The China Capt. delivered me ij small
cheanes of gould, sent me in present out of China, viz. 1 from Chisian
Ducuco and 1 from Ticham Shofno, ij of the Emperor of Chinas councell;
but the last from Ticham Shofnos sonne, his father being slaine in the
Tartarian warr; they sending me word that we may have free trade into
China, and the rather for that the ould king hath delivered up the
goverment of China to his sonne.

All our neighbours that weare envited on Sunday last came to dyner
this day, and had the _fro_ heate[d], and a play of _caboques_, unto
whome I sent two bars of plate containing viij _taies_ vj _mas_.

Capt. Speck came to me late to desire me to look out for Capt. Adames
_goshon_ to get Japons goe in his junck for Bantam, he standing in
dowbt that Andreas, Capt. Adams woamans brother in law, is gone to
Nangasaque to make it away to others.

_January 10_ (_Shiwas 28_).--I wrott 2 letters into China per conveance
of Andrea Dittis, 1 to Chisian Dicuco and 1 to Ticham Shofno, of
recept 2 chenes gould, with other complementall matters.

I lent my _goshon_ to Andrea Dittis, China Capt., and Itamia Migell       126
Dono, to make a voyadge for Tonkin or Cochinchina, and to retorne it
to me, voyadg enden, under a recept geven me in Japons, fermed per
both.

_January 11_ (_Shiwas 29_).--I was suretie for China Capt. for 1500
_tais_ plate barrs, taken up at intrest at 2 per cento per month from
first of later moone of _Shiwas_, being the 13th of this month of
January, antedated 2 daies, for 7 month space; which is to be sent
into China with 1500 _taies_ more from China Capt. to procure free
trade into China; which not taking effect, the China Capt. is to repay
the 1500 _tais_ back, with the intrest, for Honble. Companis use.

_January 12_ (_Shiwas 30_).--We sent our _jurebasso_, Tome Dono, with
the Hollands _jurebasso_, to Nangasaque, with a letter to Gonrok Dono,
with good wordes once more to desire his Lordshipp to take the lead as
the Councell sett price.

_January 13_ (_Second Shiwas 1_).--Andrea Dono, Capt. Addames brother in
law at Edo, arived heare this day, and brought the _goshon_ of Capt.
Adams from themperour, which Capt. Speck soe much desireth to make use
of to sett out their junck for Bantam, otherwais she will loose her
voyag this year (as she did the last). Soe I made it knowne to Andrea,
who tould me he dowbted to doe it, in respeck of the badd tong of Jno.
Yoosen that kept such a bawling at Emperours court against it. Soe he
thought nether Capt. Speck nor I would be an occation to disgrace the
children of the deceased Capt. Adams, whome we weare bound rather to
favour then otherwais. And that which was more, he had, in the
childrens behalfe, bought the halfe of a junck at Nangasaque, wherin
he ment to goe hym selfe and make use of the _goshon_ lawfully. Unto
whome I answered that he might make acco. that nether Capt. Speck nor
my selfe ment not to doe any thing prejuditiall to our deceased
frendes children in any sort whatsoever, but yf he had bought halfe       127
that junck, that Capt. Speck should take and quit hym of that losse
and all other dangers that might ensue; and that upon necessitie it
was as fitt our frendes should make use of it as a China or any other
stranger. Soe we agreed to morow morning to goe to Capt. Speck and
take councell about it.

_January 14_ (_Shiwas 2_).--I went to the Holland howse about the
_goshon_, and cald Andreas thither, to perswade hym to deliver it to
me and lett the Hollanders make use thereof to the most benefite of
Capt. Adams children. But he answerd me he hadd sent it overland from
Shimena Seak to Nangasaque by one of Mrs. Adams men. Yet, before, he
tould me it was heare at Firando, but that he could not let me nor noe
other have it, in respect he had promised it to one Goquan, a China,
and had bought the one halfe of his junck. And then I asked hym whoe
gave hym authoretie to dispose of this _goshon_, I sending it up to be
renewed, without taking my councell herein. Unto which he could make
noe answer. Soe I required a writing at his hand of sending the
_goshon_ from Ximina Seak, and therin he promised me to use meanes to
retorne it to me, and would goe to morow with me to Nangasaque to
performe it.

_January 15_ (_Shiwas 3_).--I was enformed Andreas sent away a boate at
midnight past to Nangasaque, to adviz his consortes of my demand for
the _goshon_. Soe this day at nowne I went towards Nangasaque about
that matter and our leade, and desird Andrea to goe with me as he
promised, and went to his lodging with my bark to call for hym; and he
sent me word he would com after in a bark of his owne.

Soe we went this night 12 leagues on our way, and came to an ancor.

_January 16_ (_Shiwas 4_).--We arived at Nangasaque this day at 3 a
clock in the after nowne, but Andrea was not com. And I fownd Tome
Dono, our _jurebasso_, whoe hadd spoaken with Gonrok Dono about my        128
plito with Cuemon Dono of Nangasaque for the bords and tymber; and he
tould hym he would refer it till he came to Firando 10 or 12 dais
hence, and then end it before Tonomon Samma, the king's brother, whome
had spoaken about the matter before.

Also I sent to Jenquese Dono, Mrs. Adams frend, to adviz hym of my
being heare and wherabout I came; yet he came not to me.

And at night Itamia Migell Dono came to vizet me with Hollands ost and
divers others, and brought me a banket with ij _barsos_ wyne and ij
wilduckes; and Palus (? Pauls) father a basket orenges and 18 small
lobstars.

_January 17_ (_Shiwas 5_).--I sent to Gonrok Dono and Feze Dono of my
arivall and that I would vizet them to morow or next day. But Gonrok
made a feast to princepall in this place.

Andrea arived heare and sent me word he was aweary, yet ment sowne
after to com and speak with me.

Many presentes were sent unto me.

_January 18_ (_Shiwas 6_).--Andrea of Edo came to me after nowne and
tould me he could not nor would not deliver the _goshons_ unto me,
telling me he did that which he did by order from Capt. Adams woman.
Unto which I answered that that woaman had nothing to doe with it, but
her children, whom I had charg over and not shee. And then he answerd
me, she (or he for her) had taken all the paines and disburced the
money to buy presentes to get out the 2 _goshons_. But, at same
instant, Tozayemon Dono standing by answerd that he had delivered iij
C. and odd _taies_ to Jenquese, Capt. Adames man, he demanding it for
that purpose, this plate belonging to the deceased Capt. Adames. Soe I
then demanded of Andrea whoe disburced this plate, he or I? Unto which
he could answer nothing; but Tozayemon Dono desired me to refer the
matter to hym till to morow, and he would end it to both our contentes.

And this day we went to dyner to Itamia Migell Dono, where we had kind    129
entertaynment and great cheare with _caboques_.

And I sent my packes of letters to Firando, to goe in the Hollandes
junckes for Bantam and Syam.

_January 19_ (_Shiwas 7_).--We were envited to dyner to Kitskin Donos
howse, and hadd good entertaynment.

_January 20_ (_Shiwas 8_).--A Portugez called Augustino de Fiquira came
to me and desyred a letter to Capt. Speck to retorne hym a slave of
his which was in cure of the ---- in the Duch howse, as he understood,
his name being Francisco Mallabar. Of the which I gave hym a letter
with the slaves name, with my opinion the keeping of such a slave
would doe us nether creddit nor profitt.

And we were envited to dynner to Groby Dono, the Hollandes host at
this place, where we had greate cheare, with the dansing beares.

And at last cast Tozayemon Dono sent me word, now I have staid 2 dais
at his request, that Andrea and the rest will doe nothing.

_January 21_ (_Shiwas 9_).--I went to Gonrok Dono to demand justice
against Andrea, Jenquese, and Wyamon, for the _goshons_ of Capt. Adams
and the money they have receaved without lycense from me. And he gave
me faire wordes, and willed me to retorne to hym to morrow after
nowne, for that he was envited out to a frendes howse to a banket and
at instant ready to departe.

And we were envited to supper to Paulo Dono, our gunpouder man, where
we had good cheare, and many chambers and guns shott affe.

_January 22_ (_Shiwas 10_).--I went againe to Gonrok Dono about my plito
with Andrea of Edo for the _goshons_ of Capt. Adames children. But he
sent for the said Andrea, and, in my hearing, tould us both he would
not meddell in the matter, he being of Edo and I of Firando. Soe I
think Gonrok was grezed in the fist before hand.

Also Cuemon of Nangasaque came before hym about our processe with Ed.     130
Sayer for the 100 _tais_ he saieth he had not receved, although we
have his hand to shew for it. Soe Gonrock Dono entreated me to geve
hym 50 _tais_, because he was a pore man, and the matter in question
both before the King of Firando and hym selfe. I answerd I would be
ruled herin per his Lordshipp, but first desired the acco. might be
perused betwix the China Capt., for me, and let hym apoint an other
for hym selfe.

_January 23_ (_Shiwas 11_).--I went and vizeted Feze Dono, the justis,
and carid hym 2 bottelles of strong waters, bottelles and all, which
he took in good parte and gave me greate thankes for it. Alsoe I sent
other two of same to Gonrok Dono, which he kindly accepted of. And I
gave the water of other 2 to Alvaro Gonsalves and Alferes Twerto.

Also I took up iij M. _tais_ in plate of barrs this day of Tozayemon
Dono, our host of Sackay, at ij per cento per month, or else at his
coming to Firando to geve hym silke or other comodety in payment to
his content, or keepe the money for 5 months at intrest.

This day Hollands junck departed from Firando towardes Syam.

_January 24_ (_Shiwas 12_).--The China Capt. sent away 16 China marrens
to Capt. Speck.

I left a letter with Alvaro Gonsalves for to deliver to Emanuel
Rodrigos when he returneth from Xaxma, of my coming hither only to
make plito against Capt. Adames men for delivering the two _goshons_
without making me privie to it; and that Jenque hath receved above
1000 _tais_ of Capt. Adams money without making me privie to it nor
how it is disburced; and Wyamon Dono, an other of the deceased Capt.
Adams men, hath taken up 400 _tais_ worth merchandiz of me, and meneth
to goe capt. of the _goshon_ in his junck without making me payment;
and Torosacka, an other of Capt. Adams men, oweth Mr. Eaton 50 _ta_,      131
and meneth to goe offecer in his junck without making payment, which I
desire non of them may. As also that Mr. Eaton hath certen fyne corse
lynen, which he meanes to send to Manillias.

The China Capt. junck arived from Firando.

I receved a writing of Itamia Migel Dono to retorne me my _goshon_ at
retorne of juncke _Willing Mind_.

And I reconed with Paule for these thinges bought, viz.:--

                                                _ta.  m.  co._
  For a chist                                    00   6    0
  For 5 baskittes to put oringes in              00   1    6
  For halfe a beefe                              01   3    5
  For an emptie jarr to put bread in             00   0    6
  For 16 roles biskett bread                     00   7    5
  For neales to neale 2 money chistes            00   0    1
  For reddish rootes to spend at sea, with other
    hearbs and rootes                             0   1    3
  For 3 hense for sea                             0   1    5
  For fish at sea to eate                         0   3    0
  For xx loves bread for sea                      0   2    0
  For 440 candelles for howse provition           4   0    0

And geven for a present to China Capt. junck, viz.:--

  For 2 emptie barilles                           0   2    4
  For 80 _gocos singe_                            1   1    5
  For ij _tay_ fishes                             0   1    2
  More 5 roles of bread aforsaid.

And I sent Mr. Osterwick to Gonrok Dono with a coppie of my processe I
ment to begyn with Capt. Adames servantes about the _goshons_, for the
childrens right.

_January 25_ (_Shiwas 13_).--I reconed with Paule for these thinges
following, viz.:--

                                                _ta.  m.  co._
  For 118 _gocos_ of _singe_ for sea              1   6    9
  For 1 bunch of carrotes                         0   0    5
  For 9 _gocos_ of vinager for sea                0   1    8
  For 1 sack salt for sea                         0   1    0
  For a jarr to putt egges in                     0   0    6
  For ij mattes to make up money chist            0   0    2              132
  For 5 sacks of coles                            0   2    2
  Mor for 2 sacks rise for marrenars              1   5    0
  And 1 sack geven the pore                       0   7    5
  And 1 for provition for sea                     1   1    5

I retorned towardes Firando after nowne; and we paid out for diett in
the howse 20 _ta._, and to the servantes 1 bar plate, is 4: 3: 0.

And I gave 2 peeces black satten, the one to Capt. Chinas wife, and
the other to his sonne Augustins wife.

And Paulo Dono, our gunpouder man, went out to meete us with a banket
3 leagues on our way, and placed chambars on a rock and shott affe 12
or 14 tymes.

So we arived at Setto at night.

_January 26_ (_Shiwas 14_).--We departed from Setto, and paid in
howse, viz. for howse rowme 1: 0: 0, for fish geven us 0: 3: 0.

Soe, the wind rising, we put into Woamon Docka.

_January 27_ (_Shiwas 15_).--About midnight we departed from Woamon
Docka, and arived at Firando about 10 a clock this day in the affore
nowne.

We paid at Woamon Doka, for howserowme 1: 1: 0, and for fish at one
draught 0: 7: 0, and for 3 other tay fish 0: 1: 0, and for live fresh
fish 0: 3: 0.

And at my coming to Firando I found that Man the Companis slave,
bought the last yeare at Nangasaque to goe in our junck for a cawker,
was run away, and hath stolne plate and other matters. This fello hath
byn a secret theefe ever since he came into the howse, and hath stolne
dyvers silver cupps, spoones, and forkes, with other matters, both of
the Companis and others.

I sent all the orenges, rownd biskit cakes, and sweete bread to our
neighbors wives whoe lent us money and furnished us with our tymber,
mastes, biskit, etc.

_January 28_ (_Shiwas 16_).--I paid out myselfe in plate barrs vij        133
_tais_ for the outsides of 3 _kerremons_ for Mr. Eatons sonne Wm., his
hostes daughter, and China Capt. doughter.

Capt. Leonard Campes came to thenglish howse, and tould me he knew not
where the 2 negros weare which came from Nangasaque, which Alvaro
Gonsalves and others wrot for; nether thought he it was fitt to
retorne them, although he did know where they weare. Unto which I
answerd that yf it were my case, as it was his, I would retorne them
both, but espetially the one which was our frends slave. But it semeth
he will not, nether take hym at 50 R. of 8, as he cost Alvaro
Gonsalves.

_January 29_ (_Shiwas 17_).--I wrot 3 letters to Nangasaque about Man,
the Companies slave which is run away, viz. 1 to Skidayen Dono,
secretary to Gonrok Dono, 1 to Paule the gunpoulder man, 1 to Yoshemon
Dono, Pauls father, to look out for hym; laying to his charge the
stealing of silver cupps, spoons, and forks, with other matters; and
they to seek hym out and send hym back in bonds.

Also I wrot to Alvaro Gonsalves I canot procure his servant out of the
Hollanders handes.

The Hollandes junck for Bantam went out to Cochie Roade this day, and
shott affe 7 peces ordnance and had the chambers and other ordnance
shott out of Hollandes howse. And I sent the capt. of her a barill of
_skar_ beare and an other to Hollandes howse.

_January 30_ (_Shiwas 18_).--I paid to the hatmaker China teliar, for
making aparell, in small plate ij _ta._ vij _mas_. More for a
_kerremon_ geven a child, small plate xv _mas_.

_January 31_ (_Shiwas 19_).--I delivered iij chistes of plate of barrs
to Mr. Eaton, the same I receved of Tozayemon Dono at Nangasaque, to
accompt with Cushcron Dono, our neighbors and others about provition
of our fleete; and paid per him 2000 _tais_.

And I carid my packet of letters to the Hollands howse, to send for
Bantam in the junck, per Capt. Albartus, being coppies of them sent       134
per the _Royal James_ both to the Honble. Company in England and
precedent at Bantam, with others of 20th present and this day, as
appereth per coppies. And in these letters I sent the coppie of
taxation of _Swan_ per Hollanders and other charges about her in
comune, she going with fleete for the Manillias; as also a note of
charges laid out for James Littell, sent presoner in the junck for
Bantam, in said junck: amont unto, in all, 12 _ta._ 1 _m._ 9-1/2 _co._

And Mr. Eaton paid iij _tais_ in small plate unto Tome of Nangasaque,
who staid heare 18 daies to prune, cutt, and sett our trees in
orchards and garden.

And the cutlar came to make cleane my weoapons this day.

Also this day a carpenter was cutt in peeces for a muteny he and other
xj made, to enter a pedlars house and cutt certen wooden shewes in
peeces, they esteeming to have preveledg to make such matters. All xij
had died for it, yf the queene mother had not begged their lives.

_February 1_ (_Shiwas 20_).--I sent ij _taies_ to the dansing beares, in
small plate, they coming to our garden with a banket when we planted
our trees. And we began our work to wall in our howse, newly bought to
make a gadong in.

_February 2_ (_Shiwas 21_).--I paid out xiij _tais_ plate of barrs my
selfe unto the founders for a peace of a cheane of gould, and sent the
money per Luarance my boy. Also I paid out, in small plate, for divers
thinges for Susan, viz.:--

  For ij gerdelles for servantes in howse        0  3  0
  For i bundell of paper, for selfe              0  1  5
  For 1/2 _catty_ tobaco, ditto                  0  0  5
  For woamans oyle, ditto                        0  2  5
  For _chaw_, ditto                              0  2  0
  For i peare wooden clamps, ditto               0  1  0

More paid out to Larrance, my servant, to buy hym a coate or
_kerremon_ of silke, in small plate, 4 _ta._

And I went to Oyen Dono, kinges secretary, to vizet hym, and carid hym    135
a bottell Spanish wine and a greate fish, and took his councell about
buying our three neighbours houses, and to aske leave to make our
wharfe or kay 3 _tattamis_ further out into the sea. He tould me he
would make it knowne to Tonomon Samme and Taccamon Dono, and then
would advize me when it was tyme to goe my selfe.

And I rec. an other letter frem Alvaro Gonsalves about his caffro, and
he sent the like to Hollandes Capt., but they will deliver no caffro.

_Febrary 3_ (_Shiwas 22_).--I receved ij letters from Nangasaque in
answer of myne, 1 from Palue (_sic_) Dono, the gunpoulder man, 1 from
Yoshemon Dono, Palus father, tuching Man the slave. They write me how
Skidayen Dono, Gonrok Donos secretary, having receved my letter, went
to Feze Dono and shewed it to hym. Soe they made a comune serche
throwe the towne for the theefe Man, and, not finding him, comitted
his father, mother, and brother to preson, with an other, his master
which sould hym, whoe the ten of the streete are bound to answer for
his forth coming, and, in fallt of fynding out the theefe, must answer
with their lives or geve us content for what is stolne. And I retorned
answer of my ij letters rec. this day from Nangasaque, thanking them
for their paines taken to find out the fugetive theefe Man, and that
we could not find hym out heare, desiring them to look out theare to
his sureties to retorne hym to me, and I would use hym noe worse then
he deserved. These ij letters I retorned per Paule the gunpowder man
his man, whome he sent expres to me to adviz what hadd past. And I
gave hym 5 _mas_, to pay for his boate hier, and a silke coate or
_doboque_,[94] an upper garment or Japon cloake.

And I paid the Spanish telier five R. of 8, as followeth viz.:--

  For buttons and loopes for a black bay coate, being 31   2 R. 8         136
  For making the said bay coate                            2 R.
  For buttons for the sleeves                              0-1/8 R.
  For buttons and loopes for a Portingall cap, or
    _galtera_[95]                                          0-3/8 R.
  For making the said _galtera_ or capp, 4 _mas_ is        0-1/2 R.

Which money I paid in Spanish R. my selfe, being 3 tymes more then was
reason; and so an end, etc.

We lent Andrea Dittis, China Capt., viz. 3 murthering peeces, or
fowlers, with vj chambers, wherof 2 bras; 3 hargabushes of
crockes[96]; and 4 Japon calivers or guns.

And the gouldsmith came to work this day.

     [94] _D[=o]-buku._

     [95] Port.: _gualteira_.

     [96] Probably the "crook", or rest, for the harquebus.

_Febrary 4_ (_Shiwas 23_).--This morninge cold wether, with a hard
frost, with snowe. Hard frost all day, and the like per night
following.

_Febrary 5_ (_Shiwas 24_).--Capt. Leonard and Capt. Albartus and Wm.
Cuiper went to the kinges brother to take leave of hym, to departe
with the junck towardes Bantam; Albartus going capt. and Wm. Cuiper
master. And, after, came to English howse for like occation.

And this day one Catsso Dono, the kinges kinsman, caused a master
carpenter, his servant, to cut his bellie, which was master to the
carpenter kild the other day. Soe it is thought he meaneth to pick a
quarrell with Taccamon Dono for killing his other slave the last day;
and verely thought sett on per others of the greatest sort; for
Tonoman Samme and the queene mother labourd to have had the matter
left till the king hadd retorned, but Taccamon Dono would not.

_Febrary 6_ (_Shiwas 25_).--Tyamon Dono our master carpenter came and
borrowed xx _taies_ to redeeme the other xj carpenters freed the other
day, they being taxed at iij _taies_ per head, forfeted to the king.

And I paid out money as followeth, viz.:--

  For a _kerremon_ outside, lyning and dying, for                         137
    Williams nurse                                             1   0  2
  For a silk gerdell for Tassak                                1   0  0
  And in plate bars, for ij pec. lyning for Williams coate,
    with the 2 gerls coates, is ij _tais_ 4 _mas_ bars         2   7  6
  And I paid in small plate to the glover sumaker,
    viz. for iij peare of pumps, at ij _mas_ peare             0   6  0
  For making iij peare of sue rozes at 5 _con._                0   1  5

_Febrary 7_ (_Shiwas 26_).--I went to Hollandes howse, and took leave
of Sr. Albartus, whoe I understand was ready to goe downe abord their
junck to Cochi roade.

And Gonrok Dono, governor of Nangasaque, arived at Firando, and sent
me ij silk _kerremons_ for a present, with many frendly words of
salutation.

And we agreed with Fezemon Dono of Firando, in presence of Tayamon
Dono, the carpenter, for tymber and boardes to make a new gedonge. All
which amontes unto iiij C. xxxj _tais_ vij _mas_ plate barrs, 431
_ta._ 7 _m._ 0 _c._; wherof he is to have thon halfe in hand and the
other at full delivery of all tymber, as by particulers.

_Febrary 8_ (_Shiwas 27_).--The Hollanders and we went to vizet Gonrok
Dono, and carid hym ij _tatta._ of stamet cloth for a present.

And, after, Tonoman Samme sent for us and the Hollanders to bring the
fryres before hym and Gonrok Dono, which we did, he examenynge them
what they weare, they denying to be pristes, although we shewed their
letters to verefie it. Soe Gonrok would have made a new processe of
it; but we answerd the processe was made before the King of Firando,
which we could not alter, yet would geve his Lordshipp a coppie
therof, yf he pleased, and was the same we had also delivered to
themperours councell. Soe he was contented with it.

                                              _ta._ _m._ _co._
  And I paid the cutler for skowring weapons    0    9     8
  And for making skabard for _cattan_, redd     1    0     0
  And to the gouldsmith for 3 daies work        0    4     5

_Febrary 10_ (_Shiwas 29_).--Gonrok Dono came to vizet our English howse    138
and desired to see our lead, which I shewed unto hym; which he took in
good part, as also the entertaynment he hadd; and did promise to doe
his best to bring the price of the leade to 5 _tais pico_, yet,
because he had written to the contrary, could not now on the sudden
doe it. And he being ready to departe towardes themperours court, I
sent hym ij glasse bottelles of a pottell a peece filled with Spanish
wine, to drink in the way; which he took in very kind parte.

And the Hollandes junck being ready to departe, I went to Cochie, and
toke leave of Capt. Albertus, and carid hym a barill skarbeare and a
bankett, _nifon catange_, or Japon fation. And wrot ij other letters,
viz.:--

1 to Honble. Company, enclozed to precedent.

2 to precedent of Bantam, Tho. Bockedon, and Capt. Augustyn Spalding.

And, after, I wrot an other letter to the Worll. Tho. Brokedon and
Capt. Augustin Spalding, sent per James Littell, the Scotsman, of the
duble dealing of Capt. Jacobo Especk to sett our leade at 4-1/2 _tais
pico_, without asking councell of me. Soe now he will geve but 4-1/2
_tais_ per _pico_, and not pay for it till 3 mo. hence, or it may be
more, when he pleaseth to send money from Edo or Miaco.

I wrot ij letters to the woamon of deceased Capt. Adames and to Shongo
Samma, the admerall, about the knavery of Andrea and Jenquese.

_Febrary 11_ (_Shiwas 30_).--I paid the barber for Laurance, my servant,
for tryming hym the yeare past, iij _mas_.

And Capt. Leonard Campes came to me to aske me whether I hadd
consented to lett the lead goe at 4-1/2 _tais pico_, as Gonrok Dono
had certefied hym. Unto whome I answerd that Gonrok had sent to me to
demand whether I would lett our leade passe at 4-1/2 as he had ended
with the Hollanders; unto whome I retorned answer that, yf the
Hollanders had soe agreed with hym, I would know of them, and would       139
not obstenately replie noe. So it seemed this Gonrok plaid on both
partes, thinking his faire wordes would make fooles faine; for he
tould me he esteemed our parcell of lead much better then the
Hollanders, and to the Hollanders said he esteemed theirs much better
then ours.

Divers neighbors sent wyne and fish for presentes.

_Febrary 12_ (_Shonguach 1_).--I sent the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, a
present, this being their new years day, for a new years gift, viz.:--

  1 silk _kerremon_ of them Gonrok Dono gave me.
  1 pece redd silk cheremis to his eldest doughter.
  1 damask _kerremon_ to his youngest doughter.
  1 bottell Spanish wine to hym selfe.

More, I sent to Niquan, his kinsman, 1 silke _kerremon_, which Gonrok
sent me. These presents I sent to hould frendshipp, hoping to get
traffick into China, this Niquan being emploied therein.

And I gave to our servantes in the howse, viz. to Jno. _jurebasso_,
Tome _jurebasso_, Coa Jno. _jurebasso_, Fachemon and Sangero, cookes,
and            porter, to each one a silk cloake or _doboque_.

I sent Ric. Hudson to fetch back my letter which I wrot to the
precedent at Bantam, dated the 10th present, and sent per James
Littell, the Scotchman, which letter I instantly, at recept thereof,
shewed unto Mr. Eaton and Jno. Osterwick, for that by their
countenances I perceved they thought I hadd written somthing against
them, which I had not donne, but only tuching Capt. Speck, how he did
thinges of his owne head, not making us of councell in doing thereof.
Which letter I had noe sowner shewed to Jno. Osterwick but he
forthwith went to the Hollandes howse, and there I fownd hym talking
with the Hollanders, and, as I surmised, tould them what I hadd wrott
tuching Capt. Speck, for he blusht at my entrance, Mr. Eaton              140
accompanyinge me, to speake with Capt. Leonard to determen what to
send the _tono_ to morow, and he to accompanie me in doing of it in
halves, as he thought it fitt to doe the like to Taccamon Dono, Lord
Cheefe Justis.

_Febrary 13_ (_Shonguach 2_).--We went with the Hollanders to vizet
Tonomon Samma and wish hym a good new yeare, and carid presentes,
viz.:--

  all presented in name of both.
    from our selves
      2 _barsos_ Japon wine
      2 great fyshes
    from the Hollanders
      1 bottell strong water
      1 of Spanish wine
      1 platter of fritters
      1 platter mange royall

And to Taccamon Dono:--

  presented in both names.
    from English
      2 _barsos_ Japon wine
      2 fishes, great
    from Hollanders
      1 bottell strong water
      1 bottell Spanish wine

And we sent presentes to others, viz. 2 _barsos_ wyne and 2 fishes to
Bongo Samma, Oyen Dono, Sugen Umbra Dono, his father, Sesque Dono,
Semi Donos sonne, and Sangero Samma--all from English.

And we receved presentes from our neighbours.

_Febrary 14_ (_Shonguach 3_).--We sent these presentes following, viz.
2 _barsos_ wyne and 2 great fishes to Ucana Came of Xaxma, Minema
Soyemon Dono, Geemon Dono kinges man, Cakemon Dono kinges man,
Lezeamon Dono sea _bongew_, Sheroyemon Dono his brother, and Yasimon
Dono.

And we receved presentes.

_Febrary 15_ (_Shonguach 4_).--We gave these presentes following, viz.
[wine and fish] to Chozamon Dono, Oyen Donos sonne, to Tobioye Dono,
garden _bongew_, [and others].

_Febrary 16_ (_Shonguach 5_).--The Hollands junck departed from           141
Cochie roade this day in the morning towardes Jaccatra or Bantam. God
send her a prosperous voyage.

And within night Gonrok Dono sent his man to know whether we would
lett our lead goe at 4-1/2 _taies_ the _pico_ or noe, he being
determened to departe towardes Miaco at midnight.

And I sent answer, as the Hollanders did the like, that under 5
_taies_ the _pico_ we could not sell it, it being the price sett downe
per the Emperour. Soe, after, Tonomon Samma sent me word, likwais
within night, that both we and the Hollanders should com to hym in the
morning to confer about price of the leade, and that Gonrok Dono would
be theare about it.

_Febrary 17_ (_Shonguach 6_).--Tonomon Samma sent againe for me to com
to hym about price of the leade; and I sent to the Hollanders to know
when they ment to goe about it. But Capt. Speck came to the English
howse and tould me Gonrok had sent for hym and asked him whether we
ment to lett the price of the leade goe at 4-1/2 _tais pico_ or noe;
which he tould hym, yf he had ready money heare to pay for it, he
would take councell with us. Unto which he answerd, yf we sett the
price, he would use his best endeavours to get money from Nangasaque
or Miaco within 2 or 3 months. Soe hereupon they broke affe, Capt.
Speck denying it; and Gonrok Dono departed away towardes Miaco; and
Tonomon Samma sent word we needed not to com unto hym.

_Febrary 18_ (_Shonguach 7_).--We made agreement this day with
Seezamon Dono, our wood or tymbar man, for matters following, viz.:--

  For 4 great mastes or trees containing 14 Japon _tatta._
    in length, and 1-1/2 _tatta_. rownd at greate end, and at the
    lesser end 18 inches diametar, at 150 _tais_ plate bars     _ta._
    per mast                                                     600
  For 6 smaller mastes, viz.:--
    all of one bignes, viz. at great end 1 _tatta._ rownd,                142
    and at small end xi inches diametar:
      2 of xj _tattamis_ long
      2 of x _tatta._ long
      2 of ix _tatta._ long
    At 50 _taies_ the tree (or mast), bar plate, is              300
  More, for 1000 shething boardes or plankes, containing
    3 _tatt._ long and xij Japon inches broad, but the thicknesse
    3/4 of an inch, at iij _mas_ iij _condrins_ per bord,
    barr plate, is                                               330
  More, 50 square tymbers (or _cakis_) hard wood (or oake)
    containing 3-1/2 _tatta._ in length and vj Japon inches
    square every way, at vij _mas._, barr plate, per peece is    035
  More, 50 ditto lesser, same hard wood, containing 3 _tatt._
    long per peec., 5 inches square, at 5 _mas_, bar plate, pec. 025
  To be delivered all within the space of v or vj monethes
    after the date hereof, all amonting to                      1290

_Febrary 19_ (_Shonguach 8_).--The Hollanders, viz. Capt. Speck, Capt.
Leonard Camps, Matias vander Brook, and William, came to English
house, where we had councell about sending up after Gonrok Dono for
price of the lead, and about the friggat to get it for prize. Soe it
was concluded to send an expres only with letters directed to the King
of Firando, with others to themperours councell, written in good
sorte; and to send presentes, viz.:--

  5 _tattamis_ fine damask tabling to Oyen Dono.
  5 _ditto_ to Codskin Dono.
  5 pec. fine parcullas to King of Firando.

_Febrary 20_ (_Shonguach 9_).--Taccamon Dono sent to desire me to lett
hym have the favour to serve us with gunpolder and match, and would be
bound to deliver it at as loe a price and as good as any other should
doe, unto whome he sent, they being our neighbours and his secretary.
I made answer that his Lordshipps request was reasonable, and
therefore I was content, but must stay till our fleete came, to know
the quantety of each sort; and for the gunpolder I desired that Paule
Dono, our gunpolder man of Nangasaque, might have the oversight of the
work, which it seemeth Taccamon Dono had pretended before, as his man
tould me.

Capt. Adames childe in Firando was brought to me per the mother, unto     143
whome I gave ij _tais_ in small plate, and offerd her to pay for
the bringing of it up to schoole, yf she would deliver it to thenglish
nations protection.

_Febrary 21_ (_Shonguach 10_).--I agreed with Uquese Dono the tylor to
make tilles for our new godong and other building at 23 _mas_ the 1000
tiles of all sortes, one with an other.

_Febrary 22_ (_Shonguach 11_).--We went and measured the buriall
place, and had 13 _tattamis_ square alowed us.

And Semi Dono retorned from Miaco, unto which place he accompanied the
king when he went up.

_Febrary 23_ (_Shonguach 12_).--We and the Hollanders went to vizet
Semi Dono, and we carid hym a bottell of strong water and an other of
Spanish wine, with a great box (or _bandeja_[97]) of sweet bread; and
the Hollanders ij bottelles of Spanishe wine and one of strong
water--which he tooke in kind parte, and sowne after sent us ij
_barsos_ of wine and a salmon.

     [97] Span.: _bandeja_, a sideboard or waiter.

_Febrary 24_ (_Shonguach 13_).--Yochemon Dono and the gunpolder mans
servant broght the theefe Mon back from Nangasaque, with iiij letters
from Feze Dono and Skidayen Dono and Ichemon Dono and Paule Dono, the
gunpoulder man.

_Febrary 25_ (_Shonguach 14_).--I wrot iiij letters to Nangasaque in
answer of the others I receved yisterday, geving them thankes for
their pains taken about finding out the theefe.

And I bought xij stringes of silke of som fathom long a peece, to make
pointes of; cost xij _mas_, barr plate.

_Febrary 26_ (_Shonguach 15_).--We consorted this day with Yazemon
Dono, the master sea carpenter, for tymbers, to be deliverd before the
end of the Japon _Singuach_.

Also we agreed with Trebioye Dono, the _bongew_ of the filde where the    144
buriall place is, to make a ston wall about it of 13 _tatt._ square,
for the som of 80 _tais_ plate of barrs, or, yf it be larger, to pay
for overplus per rato.

And there was ij _tattamis_ black bayes cut out this day and geven,
the one to Yoshemon Dono, Pauls father, and the other to Paulo Dono,
the gunpoulder man, for their labour in finding out Mon, the theefe,
and bringing hym from Nangasaque, with other former paynes taken.

And I was enformed that Gonrok Dono hath promised the capt. moro at
Nangasaque to procure the Emperours passe or _goshon_ that the carick
of Amacou shall trade freely into Japon to Nangasaque yearly, in
despite both of us and the Hollanders.

_Febrary 27_ (_Shonguach 16_).--Semi Dono sent me a sholder of
venison, and withall sent me word that he had conferred with Tonomon
Samma about our demand of the ij howses next unto us, and to enlardge
our wharfe or bridg 3 _tatta._ lardger into sea; which he thought
would be granted unto us. And sowne after Tonomon Samma sent me word
of the like conferrence with Semi Dono.

And I paid Trebioye Dono, the _bongew_ of buriall place, fiftie
_taies_ in plate of barrs, upon acco., to build the ston walle, agreed
upon price yisterday.

Coa Jno. our _jurebasso_ had a yong sonne borne this day.

_Febrary 28_ (_Shonguach 17_).--This day we began to build our gadong
on the W. side, and took labourers to break downe ould building and
cleare the place and make roome for ston wall.

_Marche 1_ (_Shonguach 18_).--Capt. Speck and Capt. Leonard came to
English howse to have our letters sent to Court read over.

_Marche 2_ (_Shonguach 19_).--I sent Coa Jno. _jurebasso_, to his
child feast, 1 barr of plate with ij _barsos_ of _singe_.

I sett Otto, Matingas slave, at liberty, she discovering her mrs.         145
villany, and that she had abused her selfe with vj or 7 persons, as
apereth under 3 witnesses.

_Marche 3_ (_Shonguach 20_).--I paid out to Zazabra Dono, our neighbor
on the north side, for his howse, foure skore _taies_ in plate of
barrs, wherof liiij _taies_ was paid unto Cushcron Dono for a Chinas
howse deliverd unto the said Zazabra Dono, is 54: 0: 0, and xxvj
_taies_ to Zazabra hym selfe.

_Marche 4_ (_Shonguach 21_).--We had 8 barkes laden of stones brought
this day.

And I receved 4 letters from Nangasaque, viz. 2 from Andrea Dittis,
China Capt., that he will not goe to the iland of Taccasanga this
yeare as lyers report; 1 from Harnando Ximenes, to like effect; 1 from
Pasquall Bonita.

Also Harnando Ximenes writes me that the Portingale ambassador is
retorned back to Edo per councell of Gonrok Dono, as it seemeth, to
get out a _goshon_, as also to plite against us for the friggat taken.

_Marche 5_ (_Shonguach 22_).--I gave 2 bore pigges and ij sow piges of
thenglish race, ij to Tonomon Samme and the other ij to the
Hollanders.

_Marche 6_ (_Shonguach 23_).--Oyen Dono came to thenglish howse and
tould me how Semi Dono staid only for Taccamon Dono to make an end
about our demand both for howses and kaye seaward. So I sent Tome
Dono, our _jurebasso_, to Taccamon Dono, 4 leagues hence, to desire
his Lordshipp to hasten the matter, tyme passing on, and the shipps
would be heare shortly, and then could we doe nothing.

_Marche 7_ (_Shonguach 24_).--We had xxviij barkes lading of stones.

And Tome Dono, our _jurebasso_, retorned from Taccamon Dono with
answer that, yf we had the one howse at 80 _taies_, he knew no reason
but we might have the other at same price; and for the kay or wharfe,     146
he thought we might have it, and would write thereof to Semi Dono per
his man, hym selfe being busie about building his owne howse in the
cuntrey, as our _jurebasso_ saw, he having above ijC. men at work,
and, as it is thought, determeneth to retire hym selfe to dwel in the
cuntrey and leave all to Seme Dono, whoe will be domenus factotum.
Taccamon Dono wrot me a letter he was content we should have both
howses and kay.

_Marche 8_ (_Shonguach 25_).--Upon Taccamon Donos answer I wrot a
letter to Semi Dono that all but he were content we should have both
howses and key.

And there was 146 labourers and xj carpenters this day, with xviij
boates lading of stones.

And Semi Dono sent for our _jurebasso_ and tould hym he was content to
let us have the howses and wharfe as well as other men; but as yet we
have nothing but wordes. Yet, as I perceve, the Hollanders stood out
in it that it was unfitt we should build soe far out into sea; yet
they have donne much more. Yet they will not be knowne to deale in
this matter; only Capt. Leonard tould me, yf men did fyll up the end
of the bay with building, then ther would be no place to grownd
junckes or small shiping to trym them upon. Yet ther is place enough
besides, as I tould hym.

Mr. Eaton departed this day for Nangasaque, and I sent per hym 3
letters of adviz, to goe for Manillias to our fleete, being all one
verbatum: one to goe in Emanuell Rodrigos junck, the other two in the
China Capt. junck for Caggalion and Pangasinan.

Also I sent per hym 5 letters of favour or pasportes for China Capt.,
dated the 18th ultimo, 3 for Taccasanga or Isla Fermosa, and ij for
Manillias, as abovesaid, and I wrote other letters to Nangasaque,
viz.:--

   in Spanish.
    1 to Emmanuel Rodrigos                                                147
    1 to Alvaro Gonsalves
    1 to Harnando Ximenes
  in Japons.
    1 to Itamia Migel Dono
    1 to Pasquall Bonita
    1 to China Capten

And we had xviij barkes of flatt stones this day.

_Marche 9_ (_Shonguach 26_).--We had carpenters xv-1/2, with 1 C. xxv
laborers all this day.

_Marche 10_ (_Shonguach 27_).--We had 19 carpenters and 118 laborers
this day.

The Hollanders hadd the _caboques_ this day, and sent for me and Mr.
Osterwick, and soe had a play.

We had iij barkes lading flat stones.

_Marche 11_ (_Shonguach 28_).--I wrot an other letter to Nangasaque to
Itamia Migell Dono in favour of Cujero Dono which goeth in his junck,
as also to desire hym to have a care he goeth to the place apointed
per my _goshon_ and to no other. And I wrot an other to Mr. Eaton to
same entent, to writt per Cujero Dono and send my letter ther inclozed
to deliver to first English or Holland ship he meetes withall, to
thentent, yf Itamia Migel Dono goe for Amacan and lade Portingals
goodes, to seaz upon it and bring yt for Japon, and then after geve
rezon for it.

_Marche 12_ (_Shonguach 29_).--Semi Dono and Taccamon Dono sent each
of them a man to tell me they came to deliver the kay towards the sea
unto me, but it should be but ij _tattamis_; unto whome I made answer
that, yf it weare not iij, I would not take it but rather rest as we
weare and not breake our howse and spend ij or iij C. _taies_ for
nothing. And withall I sent our _jurebasso_ to tell them that, yf they
gave us vj _tattamis_ it weare far better for the harbor, as I would
prove, yf they pleased to understand me. But I know it is the hollow
harted Hollanders geve councell for dispite to disgrace us, as tyme
will try it.

I rec. a letter from Andrea Dittis, China Capt., to same effect as        148
that from his son Augustyn, that he ment to send hym and Niquan on the
voyage.

And we had 1 C. xxx laborers and xviij carpenters and a cane man
wrought all this day.

_Marche 13_ (_Ninguach 1_).--Taccamon Dono sent for our _jurebasso_
and tould hym he hadd donne as a frend in our demand for the iij
_tatta._ to be alowed for our key into the sea, but others stood out,
although he and the whole streete took our part. So that, yf I would
geve a writing under my hand to stand for the kings award at his
retorne, he would deliver it; which I performed.

_Marche 14_ (_Ninguach 2_).--We had this day xviij carpenters and j C.
lx laborers all day, with iij tilors halfe a day, and 1 caneman all
day; and we rec. viij barkes flatt stoones this day.

And I receved the box of specktacles at the handes of Mr. Osterwick:
17 dozon and 3 peare specktacles in all.

And I bargened this day with Yasimon Dono for these tymbers and
boardes following, to be delivered at ij moneths, viz.:--

                                   _ta.  m.  co._
  1500 small boardes, viz.          30   0    0
  1000 _tarakis_ or spars           35   7    0
  1000 _nukes_ or rayles            25   0    0
  0020 _ficamons_ or beames         26   0    0
  0500 _marakis_ or rownd tymber    16   0    0
                                   ------------
                                   132   7    0
                                   ------------

_Marche 15_ (_Ninguach 3_).--We had 15 carpenters and 93 laborers and
1 caneman, 3 tilors; but 53 laborers all day, and 40 laborers at iiij
_condrins_ pece per day. And we hadd 10 barkes lading flatt stoones
this day.

Also Itamia Migell Dono sent me 2 _barsos_ wine and stringes drid
cuttell, desiring me to send hym a pasport or letter of favor, yf he      149
chansed to meet with any English or Hollandes shipps at sea.

_Marche 16_ (_Ninguach 4_).--I rec. xxix _tais_ viij _mas_ iiij
_condrins_ plate barrs for merchandize sould unto Shushro Dono of
Firando.

And we had this day 18 carpenters, 167 laborers, one plasterer, iij
tilors, and one caneman.

Also we had this day xix barkes stones.

_Marche 17_ (_Ninguach 5_).--We had 14 carpenters, 190 laborers, 1
plasterer, and 1 caneman.

Capt. Leonard Camps, with Sr. Matias and Jacob Swager went to
Nangasaque; Matias and Swager to goe on a voyage for Cochinchina in a
Japon junck.

And I wrot 3 letters to Nangasaque: 1 to Mr. Eaton, with a pasport
enclozed for Itamia Migell Dono, yf he would geve sureties that the
junck shall goe for Cochinchina and not for Amacon.

_Marche 18_ (_Ninguach 6_).--We had this day 9-1/2 carpenters, 155
laborers, and 1 cane man. Also we had 5 barks lading of flatt stones.

And being driven affe from day to day per Semi Dono and Taccamon Dono
about geving us licence for 3 _tatta._ out to sea to enlardg our kay
or wharfe, they, having hetherto promised it, did now send me word
they must shorten it. Wherupon I wrot a letter to them both, how I
knew they had geven 5 tymes more to the Hollanders and howrly
augmented it with all the howses they demanded to be puld downe, and
shortned thenglish in all they demanded, contrary to the kinges promis
at his departure to let us have all we demanded, soe that now I did
but expect answer whether they would let me have that promised per
themselves or no, and soe would rest satisfied.

We sould silk of divers sortes to Tozamon Dono of Sackay for 3575: 2: 5.

_Marche 19_ (_Ninguach 7_).--We had 16 carpenters, 161 laborers,          150
1 plasterer, and 1 caneman, all this day. We had x barkes lading rownd
stones.

_Marche 20_ (_Ninguach 8_).--We had 28 carpenters, 147 laborers, 2
plasterers, and 1 caneman.

_Marche 21_ (_Ninguach 9_).--We had xiiij laborers this day to sift
white lyme and make it, with other matters.

And we envited Tozemon Dono and other merchants to dyner, and heat the
_fro_ for them, they enviting themselves thereunto; and had the
dansing beares sent for, _nifon catange_ or Japon fation.

_Marche 22_ (_Ninguach 10_).--I wrot 3 letters in Japons to
Nangasaque, viz. 1 to Itamia Migell Dono; 1 to Andrea Dittis, China
Capt.; 1 to Skidayen Dono, Gonroks secretary, desiring hym not to let
Ita. junk goe out till he gave surtis to goe for Cochinchina, and
warning Itamia Migel Dono hym selfe to se it performed, as he would
answer it before the Emperour; and the China Capt. to se it performed,
he being suretie to me.

We had xxx carpenters, 1 C. l. laborers, ij plasterars, and iij
tilars, all this day.

And we receved five hundred tilles this day, viz., iij rownd ends, and
ij C. pointed endes; as also 5 boates lading rownd stones.

_Marche 23_ (_Ninguach 11_).--We had 31 carpenters, 147 laborers, iij
tilors, ij plasters, all this day.

Semi Dono sent to comand me I should make noe bargen nore buy nothing
of any other Japonnars for provition of building of howse or shiping
or victuling, but only of them of Firando. Unto whome I retorned
answer that he should pardon me in that matter, for I would buy wheare
I could find best cheape, either at Firando, Nangasaque, Miaco, or
else wheare; but as yet I had bought all of them of Firando, and soe
would doe the like hereafter, yf they would lett me have it as good
and as good cheape as others. Unto which he answerd he would take care
for that, but would have me promisse to take it all of Firando men        151
and no other, or else he would geve comand that noe carpenters nor
laborers should work any more on our work. And I answerd, he might doe
herein as he pleased, for to doe as he would have me was against the
preveleges themperour and his councell had granted our nation. So
forthwith he gave comand to carpenters and all other laborars that
none should labor; and soe our work standes at a stay.

And we had 62 gutter tiles this day.

_Marche 24_ (_Ninguach 12_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to Taccamon Dono
to know whether he hadd geven comandment our work should stay and not
goe forward. But he sent me word he medled not in the matter, it
belonging unto Semi Dono and not to hym. Soe, after, I sent for Capt.
Speck to goe with me to speake to Semi Dono, to know wherefore he
staid our worken. But Semi Dono sent us word he was busy about matters
of justis, soe that we might com towardes night; but in the meane tyme
Capt. Speck sent hym a letter which pasefied his proud humor.

_Marche 25_ (_Ninguach 13_).--We hadd our wharfe into the sea deliverd
us this day to content. But Semi Dono sayd, as he passed by our dore,
it was by his apointment, lighting affe his horse, telling me he was
sory I was angry with hym. Unto whome I replied, I was sory his
Lordship was angry against me, whoe was ready to doe his Lordshipp the
best service I could; and soe he departed. But Taccamon Dono sent me
word that it was he and others stood out for us, Semi Dono desiring it
should have staid till the kinges retorne, and not have byn deliverd.

We receved this tymber following for the buriall place, viz. of Tymon
Dono:--

  122 _marrokis_ or rownd tymbers, at ij per _mas_.
  062 _cakis_ or square tymbers, at j _mas_ per pec.
  110 boardes of 1 _tatt._ long, at 5 per _mas_.
  170 _tarrakis_, at 12-1/2 per _mas_.
  004 greate _marokis_ for the dore, at 8 _mas_ pec.                      152
  001 great _caky_ for dore, at 3-1/2 _mas_.
  001 duble _caky_ for dore, at 4 _mas_.

_Marche 26_ (_Ninguach 14_).--We had 15 carpenters, 134 laborers, 5
tylors, and ij plasterers, all this day.

We rec. yisterday of Tayemon Dono tymber, viz. 102 _nuquis_, or
rayeles, at 4 per _mas_, for gedong, and 600 _shemottes_, or rownd
small poles, for gedong, at 30 per _mas_.

And I sent a barr of plate to the _caboques_, due for playing the
night when Tozemon Dono and others weare envited for sale of our
silke.

Also we had 24 carpenters and 58 laborers this day for our work at
buriall place.

_Marche 27_ (_Ninguach 15_).--We had 15 carpenters, 121 laborers, 5
tilors, and 2 plasterers, all this day. And we receved iij C. tiles
this day from tilar of Tabilo.

And Capt. Speck and my selfe wrot 3 letters to Nangasaque about the
busynes of the _goshon_ lent to Itamia Migell Dono, viz. 1 to Skidayen
Dono, the chefe justis, under my owne ferme, to desire hym to comand
Migell Dono not to goe for Amacon; 1 to Itamia Migell Dono, with the
fermes of Capt. Speck, Capt. Leonard Champes, and my selfe, to same
effect; 1 to Skidayen Dono, with our 3 fermes, to same effect.

_Marche 28_ (_Ninguach 16_).--We had 9 carpenters, 97 laborers, 2
plasterers, and 1 caneman, for the howse; and, for buriall place, 30
carpenters, 34 laborers, all day.

Semi Dono, Taccamon Dono, and others, went this day to Ishew to vizet
Tonomon Samma, whoe is gon thither to hawk and hunt 8 or 10 daies
past.

_Marche 29_ (_Ninguach 17_).--We had 8 carpenters, 102 laborers, ij
plasterers, and 1 cane man, for the howse, all this day; and for the
buriall place, 30 carpenters, 52 laborers. And we receved tymbers, ij
barkes lading this day, viz. 124 great _caquis_, or square tymber, and
44 great _nuqins_, for gedong; also 38 _marakis_ for the buriall          153
place.

Capt. Leonard Camps retorned from Nangasaque, and sent me word that
Mr. Eaton would be heare this night or to morrow, and that all the
junckes weare gon out and Sr. Matias in that of Jno. Yoosen.

_Marche 30_ (_Ninguach 18_).--We had 39 carpenters, 132 laborers, 2
plasterers for 1/2 day, for howse, and 82 laborers, halfe day, and 50
laborers, whole day, for howse; and 10 carpenters and 4 laborers all
day for buriall place.

_Marche 31_ (_Ninguach 19_).--We had 50 carpenters, and 32 laborers,
for howse, and, for buriall place, 7 carpenters and 4 laborers, all
day.

_Aprill 1_ (_Ninguach 20_).--We had 50 carpenters, 20 laborers, for
howse, and, for buriall place, 4 carpenters, 4 laborers, all day.

Mr. Eaton retorned this night from Nangasaque.

_Aprill 2_ (_Ninguach 21_).--We had 53 carpenters, 172 laborers, 1
plasterar 1/2 day, and one cane man 1/2 day, the rest all day, for the
howse, with 12 carpenters and 12 laborers for the buriall place.

And Mr. Eaton delivered these papers in Japons unto me, viz.:--

1 recept of Ichemon Dono.

1 bill of Cuemon Dono.

1 coppie of a writing sent to Cochinchina per Mr. Eaton per Capt.
Chimpan, to recover in what he can, the one halfe of which he is to
have for hymselfe, and thother for the Company, of all he can gett
ether of that lost per Mr. Peacock or Mr. Sayer; for beter somthing
then nothing.

1 writing in Japons, fermed per Itamia Migell Dono named Ziemon, Soude
Giemon, his boteswaine, and Shobioye Dono, his purser or scrivano,
wherin they are bound upon payne of livse and goodes not to tuch at
Amacon nether going out nor retorning home, but to goe directly for
Cochinchina, and noe place else.

Yt is reported that the King of Goto hath cutt his belly at Miaco by      154
comand of themperour, by reason he put away his wife, which was of the
blood royall (he being made king by marying of her), and took an other
woaman of basse degree in her place. This is the generall report, yet
som say he is not yet dead, but in greate danger to die, the matter
having been in plito the space of 4 or 5 yeares.

_Aprill 3_ (_Ninguach 22_).--We had 70 carpenters, 33 laborers, and 1
caneman, for howse, and ij carpenters and iiij laborers for buriall
place.

I gave Coa Jno. _jurebassos_ wife a bar plate with a _barso_ of wyne
and box sweet bread, she going to a new howse, and brought her child
to me to geve it a name, which I did call Coa Jno., as his father.

Tonomon Samma, Taccamon Dono, and Semi Dono did retorne from Ishew,
where they were to take pleasure. Soe I sent our _jurebasso_ to bid
them well home in my name, and to offer them my service. But Taccamon
Dono (before the _jurebasso_ spoake with hym) sent a man to tell me of
his retorne, offring me all frenship wherin we had occation to employ
hym, either toward Tonomon Samma or else where.

_Aprill 4_ (_Ninguach 23_).--We had 72 carpenters, 56 laborers, and 1
caneman, for the howse and gadonge.

_Aprill 6_ (_Ninguach 25_).--We had 44 carpenters, 23 laborers, and 1
cane man, for howse, with iiij laborers for buriall place.

We bought tymber this day, viz. 37 _cakis_ and 53 duble _cakis_, pyne
tree.

_Aprill 7_ (_Ninguach 26_).--We had 46 carpenters, 23 laborers, and 1
caneman, for howse, and 4 laborers for buriall place.

We whipped Man, our empresoned theefe, and he hath confessed he stole
the silver cup, lost when the _caboques_ weare heare a yeare past;
also that he stole the greate silver tankar at our going to               155
Nangasaque, and, as he saith, sould them at Nangasaque to Portingalles
which went in the friggattes.

_Aprill 8_ (_Ninguach 27_).--We had 58 carpenters, 45 laborers, for
the howse, and 4 laborers for the buriall place.

Ther was speeches geven out per a lying profitt or pagon prist that
this day all the iland and towne of Firando should be overwhelmed with
water, and many stood in dowbt thereof; yet it proved a lye.

_Aprill 9_ (_Ninguach 28_).--We had 53 carpenters, 74 laborers, and 1
plaster, for the howse, and 11 carpenters, 43 laborers for buriall
place.

_Aprill 11_ (_Ninguach 30_).--We had 65 carpenters, 122 laborers, and
2 plastrars, for the howse.

I deliverd 1 C. _tais_ plate barrs to Jno. _jurebasso_ upon acco. of
building.

The China Capt. retorned to Firando, and saith all the junckes are
departed on their voyages, but only two small ons which goe directly
for China.

Ther is greate seeking after place to make howses at Cochie, the king
having geven order, as they say, to erect above 200 new howses to putt
inhabitantes into. Soe Capt. Leonard Camps and Mr. Eaton went thether
to look to the measuring out of our grownd, geven us per the king,
others begining to encroche upon us, especially to get xj _tatta._,
which lieth betwixt us and the Hollanders.

Also we determen to make out our kay there into sea vj _tattamis_ in
bredth, we having 45 _tatta._ in length, and the Hollanders 40
_tattamis_, besides the xj _tatta._ betwixt us which we pretend to
demand of the king yf he will geve it us. And Japons went to esteemate
what the making out our kayes (or wharfes) might amont unto, and
esteemed it at 800 _taies_ for us and the Hollanders.

We receved 1591 tilles this day from Tabula, viz. 1215 ordinary broat
or flatt, and 376 rownd or hollo tilles--all at 23 _mas_ per j M.

_Aprill 13_ (_Sanguach 2_).--We had 67 carpenters and 103 laborers        156
for the howse, and rec. 1660 tilles from Tabilo this day.

Harnando Ximenes retorned to Firando this day from Goto, having geven
over his voyage in the Capt. Chinas junck, falling out with a China
about a whore and beating of hym.

_Aprill 14_ (_Sanguach 3_).--This day being a great pagon feast called
_Sanguach sanch_, or the therd day of the therd moone, non would work
upon it, the pagons upon their ordinary superstition, and the
Christians for feare to be noted to be Christians. Soe noe work was
donne this day. Yet on the Sonday all will work, both Christians and
pagons of Japon, and the papistes in Japon will more strictly observe
and keepe any other blind hollyday of fayned saintes (made knowne unto
them per Jesuistes and frires) then the Sabath day. This is daylie
seene per experience.

Harnando Ximenes saith he was enformed per a China which spoake
Spanish how the other Chinas, which went in the junck of China Capt.,
laid a plot to kill hym, saying, yf they did it, whoe would bring them
in question for it at their retorne. But the China Capt. saieth it was
about a whore, and noe such matter ment. But Harnando saith he
esteemeth that ould Harry Shanks, the Scotsman, whoe is gon with them,
will never retorne, but be murthered by them; which the end will
prove.

_Aprill 15_ (_Sanguach 4_).--We had 64 carpenters and 130 laborers,
for howse; and we receved 5660 tiles.

_Aprill 16_ (_Sanguach 5_).--We had 67 carpenters and 143 laborers,
with 2 plasterers and 4 tylers; and we receved 950 tyles, with ij mark
and ij head tiles, from Enquese Dono, the tilor at Tabilo.

And I paid ij _tais_ j _mas_ for 2 peces Japon taffety to lyne Capt.
Adams and Coa Jnos. childrens coates.

_Aprill 17_ (_Sanguach 6_).--We had 48 carpenters, 148 laborers,          157
2 plasterers, and 5 tillors, for howse; and 4 carpenters and 31
laborers for the buriall place.

And we receved ij M. iij C. xliiij tils ordenary from Imory; and vj C.
ditto from Tabilo, with 4 lyons, 8 mark tilles, 4 head tilles. And we
receved tymber this day from Shezemon Dono, from Umbra: 162 _nuqus_,
44 _caquis_, 1 rownd tree or _maraky_, 2 _naccabassas_ or great rownd
trees, etc.

_Aprill 18_ (_Sanguach 7_).--We had 70 carpenters, 160 laborers, 2
plasterars, and 5 tylors, for howse; and 34 laborers for the buriall
place.

  And I reconed with Tobio Dono for ston wall
    made about buriall place, it being ended
    this day, I having paid hym formerly
    50 _tais_                                  50: 0: 0
  And now, in plate bars, as the lyke before   42: 8: 0
  And geven hym in 1 plate of bar gratis       04: 3: 0
                                               --------
                                               97: 1: 0
                                               --------

_Aprill 19_ (_Sanguach 8_).--We had 71 carpenters, 140 laborers, and 2
plasters, for the howse; and for the buriall place, 4 carpenters, 44
laborers, and iij tilors. And we receved tymbers; and iij M. tiles
from Tabola, for buriall place.

_Aprill 20_ (_Sanguach 9_).--We had 75 carpenters, 58 laborers, all
day, and 52 laborers halfe day, with ij plasterars all day, for howse;
and iij tilars 1/2 the day, and 36 laborers for buriall place 1/2 a
day. And we receved 1523 tiles, with viij barkes lading of flatt stons
and one of rownd.

_Aprill 21_ (_Sanguach 10_).--We had 72 carpenters and 45 laborers for
the howse; and 4 laborers at buriall place. Also we had 1 barkes
lading rownd stones and 2 barkes lading gravill or sand. And we rec. j
M. vij C. xx tiles ordenary from Imorey.

_Aprill 22_ (_Sanguach 11_).--We had 77 carpenters, 76 laborers, and      158
2 plasterers, for howse; and xxxiiij laborers for buriall place.

_Aprill 23_ (_Sanguach 12_).--We had 73 carpenters, 71 laborers, and
ij plasterers, for howse; and 3 tillars and xxv laborers for buriall
place. And there was ij M. 1 C. liij ordenary tiles rec. from Imory;
and one barkes lading of rownd stones.

And I went to Cochie this day with Mr. Eaton to measure our grownd
geven us per the _tono_ to build upon, and find it to be l. _tatta._
long and 1-1/2 _tatta._ deepe to seaward, to make a wharfe of ston 6
_tatta._ broad and the whole length. Soe I esteemd it at 300 _tatt._
in all and did offer them i C. l. _taies_ to doe it, they demanding
iij C. _tais_. And soe we broake affe; for they had agreed with the
Hollanders before to make their key xxxiij _tatta._ long and viij
broad at one end and vj at thother, and ij _tatta._ deepe to seaward
for most parte, which I did esteem as much work as ours.

_Aprill 26_ (_Sanguach 15_).--We had 52 carpenters and 35 laborers for
the howse.

Capt. Leonard came this day and tould me that Tonomon Samma and Semi
Dono had advized hym that themperour had sent 2 greate men for
_bongews_ into Gonto, to enquire about that plito betwixt the king and
queene; and that from thence they ment to com to Firando; and in the
meane tyme Semi Dono ment to goe to meete them at Goto, and advized us
it weare expedient we sent som one to doe the like on our behalves
with a letter from us. Soe we agreed to send our _jurebasso_ with the
Hollanders to that entent, with som present of sweetmeates and wine.

Faccata Soco Dono, which lent us 3500 _tais_ at intrest, came to see
our English howse, offring us, yf we needed xx or 30000 _tais_ at
intrest at any time, he hadd it ready for us, wishing us to take non
of any others. Soe we envited hym to our _fro_ tomorrow, with v or vj
others to beare hym company, viz. Faccata Yayemon Dono, Andrea Dittis,    159
China Capt., Cushcron Dono, Synemon Dono, and Yasimon Dono; with Paulo
Dono, gunpouder man, Shoyemon Dono, Palus father, and Chubio Dono, our
host of Bingana Tomo.

_Aprill 27_ (_Sanguach 16_).--We had 67 carpenters and 40 laborers for
the howse.

I paid Lues, the Spanish telior, i _tay_ small plate for a
_carapesa_[98] of wrought velvett, black laid on with silver lace.

Semi Dono departed towardes Goto to meete themperours _bongews_; and
the Hollanders and we made ready our presentes to send to morrow
morning per our _jurebasso_, viz.:--

  for thenglish.
    1 jar conserved ginger, poiz nett, 20 _cattis_
    1 great bottell of ij gallons, strong water
  for the Hollanders.
    1 jar conservd nutmegges of like bignesse
    2 bottell of allegant or tynt wyne

     [98] Span., _carapuza_ or _caperuza_, a hood.

_Aprill 28_ (_Sanguach 17_).--We had 67 carpenters, 48 laborers, and i
plasterer, for howse, with 4 tylors and 23 laborers for buriall place.
Alsoe we receved ij M. j C. xl ordenary tilles from Imory.

And I sent a bar plate to _caboques_ for bringing a banket and coming
per water to Cochie, when wee went to measure grownd.

I rec. 5 R. of 8 of Capt. Speck, delivered hym on a wager before.

_Aprill 29_ (_Sanguach 18_).--We had 28 carpenters, 46 laborers, 1
plasterer, 1 caneman, for howse, and 4 tillors and 25 laborers for
buriall place. And there was 600 tyles ordenary rec. from Tabola.

The China Capt. envited both us and the Hollanders to dyner this day,
where we had greate cheare with dansing beares.

_Aprill 30_ (_Sanguach 19_).--We had 26 carpenters, 42 laborers,          160
1 plasterar, and i caneman, for howse all day; and for buriall place,
4 tylors and 34 laborers for halfe a day.

And I paid unto Chubio Dono, our host of Bingana Tomo, for 8 _pico_ 35
_cattis_ shething neales at 5 _tais pico_, 44: 2: 5; and for xx
_barsos morofack_, at 1 _tay barso_, 20: 0: 0. And advanced upon a
bargen of 50 _pico_ neals more, 35: 7: 5. And gave a peece black
satten to Chubio Dono upon bargen.

_May 2_ (_Sanguach 21_).--We had 32 carpenters, 86 laborers, and 1
caneman, for howse: and 1 plasterer and 23 laborers for buriall place.

I bargened this day of Tobio Dono to make a ston walle at Cochie
before our howsing, of 1 _tatta_ long, vj _tatta_ broad, and 1-1/2
_tatta_ deepe towardes sea, to be greate stonnes 1/2 a _tatta._ to
seaward and at end, and the rest small, to have ij C. _tais_ in money,
and one peece black satten.

This night, within night, the King of Xaxma passed by this place,
retorning from themperours Court. Soe we and the Hollanders went out
to meete hym, and carid a present as from both Companies, viz.:--

  1 guilt lether skin, containing 32 skins.
  1 faggott of steele.
  7 peeces white percallas.
  3 _tatta._ fyne damask tabling.

And to his secretary,

  2 peeces redd cheremis.
  3 peeces white percallas.

But he was sick, that he could not be spoaken withall, nether by
Tonomon Samma the kinges brother, whoe went out to meete hym with a
present, nether by us. Soe we left the present with the secretary,
whoe at first made diffecultie to receve it, yet in the king his
masters name promised all assistance to our shiping, yf in case any
putt into his dominions.

_May 5_ (_Sanguach 24_).--We had 41 carpenters, 139 laborers, and         161
j plasterar, for howse; and 1 plasterer and 15 laborers for the
buriall place.

And our _jurebasso_ retorned from Goto with answers from
thembassadors, who tooke in good parte the present sent to them from
us and Hollanders.

_May 6_ (_Sanguach 25_).--We had 46 carpenters and 131 laborers, for
the howse.

And there was delivered to Bonga Sammas man, for acco. of his master,
3 _cattis_ 6 _tay_ wight wax. And presently after he sent a ram gote
to thenglish house for a present, which I make acco. is in payment of
the wax.

_May 7_ (_Sanguach 26_).--We had 45 carpenters, 164 laborers, 2
plasters, and 1 caneman, for howse. Also we receved ij barkes lading
of small stones, cost xvi _condrins_; and 9 square hewed stones for
steares from Languay.

_May 12_ (_Singuach 2_).--We began to set up or reare our new howse to
sea ward.

_May 13_ (_Singuach 3_).--We had 67 carpenters and 73 laborers, for
the howse. And there was tymber rec. from Goto, of Shezemon Dono.

_May 15_ (_Singuach 5_).--We had 57 carpenters, 116 laborers, and 4
tilors, for the howse. And there was tilles receved, viz. 5633 tilles
in 2 barkes from Imory, and 1 bark containing 800 tilles from Tabola.
Also there was iij barkes lading gravill or small stons of 8 _con.
pico_.

_May 16_ (_Singuach 6_).--We had 64 carpenters, 158 laborers, and 4
tilors, and ij masons, for the howse. And we rec. x great free stons
from Languay for to make the steares, wheron the masons now work. Also
we rec. 1900 tilles ordenary from Tabola.

We went this day to Cochie to look on our work; and the Hollandes
Capt. and China Capt. met us theare; and all the dansing beares weare
theare before us.

_May 17_ (_Singuach 7_).--We had 66 carpenters, 135 laborers, 4           162
tilors, and 2 masons, for the howse. Also we rec. 4258 tilles ordinary
from Tabola.

Capt. Speck and Capt. Camps came to English howse, and we went
together to vizet China Capt., he sending for dansing beares.

_May 18_ (_Singuach 8_).--We had 64 carpenters, 115 laborers, and 2
masons, for the howse.

This day, being the 8th of Singuach, or 4th Japon moone, is the feast
of the resorection of their great profitt Shacka, as they fondly
beleeve, and soe deck all the eaves of their howses with green bowes,
and goe on pilgremadg to ther pagodes.

I sent ij bars plate, containing 6: 8: 2, to the ij companis dansing
beares, for going to Cochie and, after, to China Capt., for duble
_fannas_.[99]

Tonomon Samma and Semi Dono sent for Spanish wine and conservs, in
respect of the coming of the Emperors ambassadors, which are looked
for this night. Soe I sent eather of them a pottell bottell of wyne
and conservs to Tonomon, and a bottell strong water to Semi Dono.

And there was iij C. xx bundelles of shingelles rec. from Nangasaque.

     [99] _Hana_, a present to an actor or dancing-girl.

_May 19_ (_Singuach 9_).--We had 64 carpenters, 94 laborers, and 2
masons, for howse.

And I rec. ij letters, viz. 1 from Shongo Samma, admerall of Japon, at
Edo, in answer of myne, and that he had geven warning to Capt. Adames
woaman to let me have the disposing of the _goshons_ for her childrens
use; and thother from Uquese Dono of Miaco.

_May 20_ (_Singuach 10_).--We had 65 carpenters, 89 laborers, and 2
masons, for howse.

This evenyng the King of Arima, named Bongo Samma, arived at Firando,
and lodged in Semi Donos howse, much preparation being made to receve
hym, and all the streetes made cleane. He is in greate favor with
themperor, whoe gave hym that kingdom few yeares past, and per som        163
suspected that themperor meaneth to shift the king of this place to
Arima, and set the other heare. The last yeare he sent one of his
noblemen to vizet the King of Firando, and gave hym charge to com to
thenglish howse, and in his name to offer us any servize or favor his
kingdom afforded, or, yf we stood in need of money, he had 40 or 50000
_taies_ allwais ready at our service. Soe I now sent our _jurebasso_
to bid his Hignesse welcom to Firando; which he took in very kind
parte. Also I sent to the Holland Capt. to know yf they ment to vizet
hym to morow with som small present. And they sent me word, they had
noe accoyntance with hym and therfore ment not to goe to hym.

_May 21_ (_Singuach 11_).--We had 64 carpenters, 245 laborers, and 1
mason, for howse.

And we began to reare or set up our new gedonge this day. And we had 5
barkes lading stones for to make the steares.

And we supped at Hollandes howse, where the China Capt., Andrea
Dittis, was also envited; and we had greate cheare.

_May 22_ (_Singuach 12_).--We hadd 68 carpenters and 159 laborers, for
the howse.

The Emperors ambassadors arived at Firando, retorned from Goto with
the King of Arima, whoe went from hence to fetch them.

_May 23_ (_Singuach 13_).--We had 73 carpenters, 165 laborers, 1
caneman, and 2 masons, for the howse, the masons tide work.

The Hollanders and we went to vizet the 2 _bongewes_ or ambassadors
from themperor, and carid them for presentes as followeth, viz.:--

  Hollanders.
    2 peces cushen velvet of Hollanders
    8 peces or duble velvet cushin, ditto
  English.
    5 peces cheremis, ours
    14 peces Canton damask, ours
    2 faggottes bar steele, ours

And we rec. ij M. v C. tilles ordinary from Imory; and i M. iij C.        164
ditto from Tabola.

_May 24_ (_Singuach 14_).--We had 75 carpenters, 171 laborers, 1
caneman, and 2 masons.

We went with the Hollanders to vizet the King of Arima, and carid hym
a present betwixt us, viz.:--

  3 peces damaskes Lankin, of Hollanders.
  of English acco.
    5 peces Canton damask
    5 peces parcallas, white
    1 fagot stille

And we had j M. iij C. v tilles ordinary from Tabola.

The Emperours ambassadours, with Tonomon Samma and others, came to se
our English howse, whome we entertayned in the best sort we could.

_May 25_ (_Singuach 15_).--We had 72 carpenters, 122 laborers, 2
masons, and 1 caneman, for the howse. Also we receved i M. ij C.
ordinary tilles from Tabola.

And our rearing of the gedong being ended, we made a feast to the
carpenters, and gave these presentes, viz. to Tayemon Dono, 1 pec.
blak satten and ij _barsos_ wine and 4 fishes; to Synemon Dono 1 pec.
blak satten, he being kinges carpenter; to two other master carpenters
2 pec. white lyns; to 7 other master carpenters 7 pec. Canton damask;
to 50 yong carpenters, each one one _mas_ in paper. And Cushcron Dono,
Yosemon Dono, Shezemon Dono, sent each one a _barso_ of wine and 2
fishes.

Tonomon Samma envited the Emperors ambassadors to a hunting, and
provided a banket for them and 500 persons more in the woodes (or
forest), where they went to hunt; but the ambassadors retorned back in
the mid way and tasted not of the banket; the reason I know not.

_May 26_ (_Singuach 16_).--We had 67 carpenters, 207 laborers, 2
masons, and 1 caneman, for the howse. And we receved ij M. v C. lx
ordinary tilles from Imory, and vj C. ditto from Tabola.

This day themperours embassadors departed from Firando, and Semi Dono     165
accompanid them to Languai.

The x Japon coates or _kerremons_, sent from the Emperours councell to
Capt. Camps and my selfe for a present, came this day, and we tooke
each of us 5. And I gave 3 of myne to Mr. Eaton, Mr. Osterwick, and
Ric. Hundson.

These came per the expres we sent up about procuring price of our
lead; but noe answer of any price or any end to be made consernyng our
prize goodes taken in the friggott.

_May 29_ (_Singuach 19_).--We had 81 carpenters, 184 laborers, 3
plasters, and 8 tilors, for the howse.

And the Hollanders and we agreed to send an other expres to Edo with
letter, to procure the dispach of price of our lead and ending prize
goodes, viz. 1 to Oyen Dono, 1 to Codgskin Dono, 1 to Itamia Quenusque
Dono, 1 to Matsin Dayre Yemon, of themperours Councell; 1 to Figen a
Came, King of Firando; 1 to Torazemon Dono, his secretary. These
letters we sent expres per a foote post, because we have no finall
answer of our former; and pay the post 10 _tais_ for his voyadge.

And we rec. iij M. x tilles ordinary from Imory, and j M. j C. from
Tabola. Also a barke with xj free stoones from Nangoya.

_May 30_ (_Singuach 20_).--We had 80 carpenters, 241 laborers, 3
plasterers, 7 tilors, for the howse. And we rec. ij M. v C. iiij xx
ordinary tilles from Imory, and iij C. xx from Tabola.

_May 31_ (_Singuach 21_).--We had 83 carpenters, 168 laborers, 3
plasters, 7 tilors, 2 masons, for the howse.

_June 1_ (_Singuach 22_).--We had 79 carpenters, 105 laborers, 5
plasters, and 1 mason.

_June 2_ (_Singuach 23_).--We had 80 carpenters, 138 laborers, 5
plastarars, and 2 masons.

_June 3_ (_Singuach 24_).--We had 76 carpenters, 124 laborers, 5
plasterers, and 2 masons.

The China Capt. reportes that the newes at Nangasaque is that a           166
gallion and a junck which went from Nangasaque the last yeare or
monson for the Manillias are cast away on the Islandes of Liqueas, and
very few or non of the people saved. The junck, they say, belongeth to
Bongo Dono, the King of Arrima; and the friggat is ether that which
went out first, wherin our 2 runawaies were fownd, or else that wherin
Alvaro Munos went afterwardes.

As we sat at supper at night, there entred a Japon gentellman into our
howse, with 30 or 40 men attending on hym, and came into our halle
before we saw hym. Soe I desird hym to sitt downe and take parte of
such fare as we had; which he did, and seemed to take it in very kind
parte. And sowne after he sent me a jarr of _nipa_, or rack of _pi_,
for a present, per one of his gentelmen, per whome I understood his
masters name was Ismo Dono, a greate man of Xaxma, whome the king of
that place sendes up to Edo to kisse themperours handes and geve hym
thankes for the greate presentes and good entertaynment themperour
gave hym at his being at Edo. Soe, after his man was departed, I sent
Ric. Hudson with Tome, our _jurebasso_, abord his bark (for he passeth
secretly, and lodgeth not ashore) to crave pardon of his Lordshipp, yf
I had not geven hym such entertaynment as his worth deserved, being
ignorant of his greatnesse and abashed at the honour he did me in
sending me a present. And withall I sent hym a bottell of strong water
which, as it seemed, he took in very kynde part. Ric. Hudson and the
_jurebasso_ said he had a very great bark with a faire cabben in it,
hanged all about with ruch damask, and attended on with many men, both
ould and yong, with greate reverence and silence, their heads bowed
downe to the grownd, soe that they judged hym a man of greate
qualletie; yet he seemed not to be above xxx yeares of adge.

_June 4_ (_Singuach 25_).--We had 74 carpenters, 108 laborers, and 5
plasterers, for the howse.

And we went to Cochie this day, to look on our wharfe or ston wall        167
newly made, it being well don.

_June 5_ (_Singuach 26_).--We had 77 carpenters, 81 laborers and 5
plasterars.

And we dined at Semi Donos, where we had great cheare and kind
entertaynment; and the Hollanders are to dyne theare to morrow.

_June 6_ (_Singuach 27_).--We had 77 carpenters, 83 laborers, and 5
plasterars.

Andrea, the boateswaine, retorned from Nangasaque, and brought us a
new boate or _foyfone_, cost xxx _taies_. And he bringeth certen news
that the King of Arimas junck is cast away at Liqueas, and the people
saved and retornd to Arima per Nangasaque, who bring the news; and
also that the galliot wherin Alvaro Munos went is cast away, and not a
man saved; and an other junck, the mast apering above the water, but
not a man saved; soe they know not what junk it is, but dowbt it is
Jno. Yoosens junk.

_June 7_ (_Singuach 28_).--We had 74 carpenters, 88 laborers, and 5
plasterars, for the howse.

And I paid j C. _taies_ plate barrs to Tobio Dono, in full payment of
making the ston wall at Cochie, he having rec. j C. _tais_ more
before. And we gave him a peece black satten gratis, as we promised at
bargen making; the wall being 50 _tattamis_ long and vj _tatt._ broade
and 1-1/2 deepe at water side, as per agreement, but it is 3 spans
broader then bargen.

The Hollanders refused to goe to dynner to Semi Dono, because he
envited us before them; which Semi Dono took in very ill parte.

_June 8_ (_Singuach 29_).--We had 68 carpenters, 87 laborers, 5
plasterars.

_June 9_ (_Singuach 30_).--We had 53 carpenters, 128 laborers, 5
plasterars, and 5 tilors.

And I paid i C. xix _tais_ more unto Cosio Dono, in full payment          168
for making our kay or wharfe to sea wardes at Firando, viz:--

                                             _ta.  m.  co._
  In R. of 8. at 8 _mas._ per R. i C. R. is,  080   0   0
  In plate of bars                            039   0   0
  In i C. l _tais_ paid hym before is         150   0   0
                                              -----------
                                              269   0   0

_June 10_ (_Gonguach 1_).--We had 41 carpenters, 102 laborers, and 4
plasterars.

The Hollands Capt. sent us 50 sackes of barly for a present, in
respect we have furnished them with skarbeare from tyme to tyme. Alsoe
they sent us 2 greate _barsos_ of _morofack_, in place of 2 littell
ons lent them.

_June 11_ (_Gonguach 2_).--We had 43 carpenters, 82 laborers, and 5
plasterars, and 1 mason. And there was 12 square stones for steares
rec. this day from Nanguay.

_June 12_ (_Gonguach 3_).--We had 40 carpenters, 77 laborers, 5
plasterars, and 2 masons.

_June 13_ (_Gonguach 4_).--We had 34 Carpenters, 109 laborers, 5
plasterars, and 2 masons. And we receved tymber.

_June 14_ (_Gonguach 5_).--This day is a great feast, called _Gonguach
guench_, or the 5th day of the 5th moone called _Gonguach_.

Having ended our new building, and Tonomon Samma being to goe to Edo,
we thought good to envite hym to dyner with other noble men 3 daies
hence.

_June 16_ (_Gonguach 7_).--We had 9 carpenters, 88 laborers, 5
plastrars, and 1 mason, for the howse.

Here was speeches geven out that both English and Holland shipping
ware without, wherupon above j C. barkes went out to meet them, with
wyne, frutes, bread, hennse, and other matter. The reason was for that
3 or 4 Englishmen and Hollanders went to passe the tyme at Cochie, and
retorning back on horsback in hast, the people thought there was          169
shiping entred, they English and Hollanders telling them it was true.

_June 17_ (_Gonguach 8_).--We had 65 laborers and 5 plasterars, for
the howse.

There came to dyner this day, viz. Tonomon Samma, now called Canzemon
Samma, kinges brother; Sangero Samma, now called Matzera Crodze Samma;
Semi Dono, more then the king; Taccamon Dono, Lord Cheefe Justice of
Firando; Ito Stizemon Dono, the poet or singer, a good drinker; Morano
Cofioze, a gentelman, singer; Sofo Dono, a doctor of phisik, Japon
fation or _nifon cantange_; Showan Dono, doctor of phisik, eidem;
Ishon Dono, doctor, eidem; Shofan Dono, doctor, eidem.

All our neighbors came unsent for, to assist us in the making ready
the dynner for the nobles, which, as it seemed was much to their
content.

And I had presentes geven me, as followeth:--

  from Tonemon Samma.
    1 _langenatt_
    2 lynen _catabras_
  from Sangero Samma.
    1 silke _catabra_
    1 lynen _catabra_
  from Semi Dono.
    1 silk _catabra_
    1 lynen  ditto
  from Taccamon Dono.
    1 silk _catabra_
    1 lynen ditto

_June 18_ (_Gonguach 9_).--We had 10 carpenters, 115 laborers, 5
plasterars, and 2 masons, for the house.

Palo Dono, the gunpoulder man, bringeth news that a Portingale galliot
arived ij dais past at Nangasaque, com from Amacau; and some say j
more is coming after, others say 6 or 7. Also the Portingales report
that 4 junckes and friggattes which went from Japon to Manillas this
yeare are cast away upon that coast, and that they saw non of our
shiping nor Hollanders upon the coast of Manillas this yeare; but that
may very well be, they keeping upon that parte called Cagalion, and
this news came from Luson to Amacow.

_June 19_ (_Gonguach 10_).--We had 5 carpenters, 96 laborers, 5           170
plasters, and two masons, for the howse.

We envited our neighbors and frendes to dyner this day, after the
Japon fation, with _caboques_, viz. Coyemon Dono, Cofio Dono, Tobio
Dono, Lisomon Dono, Genemon Dono, Sannemon Dono, Jenquero Dono,
Yoyemon Dono, Faccata, Yayemon Dono, carpenter, Shezemon Dono, Taffio
Dono, Fioyemon Dono, Yoyemon, oylman, Cuze Dono, Cuzemon Dono, Seyemon
Dono, Yoiemon Dono, Nicolas Martin, Gembio, founder, Ficobioy,
founder, China Capten, Sinemon, carpenter, Tayemon, carpenter,
Yoyemon, smith, Cuemon, plasterer, Zazabra Dono, Cushcron Dono, Mr.
Eaton, Mr. Ostarwk., my selfe.

And we hadd the dansing beares, unto whom the gesse gave aboue xx
_taies_ for a larges.

_June 20_ (_Gonguach 11_).--We had 35 laborers for the howse.

I receved a letter from Goresak Dono, dated in Nangasaque 4 dais past,
wherein he writes me of the arivall of the Portingall friggat or
galliota from Amacou, and that, as they report, vj more are gon from
thence to Luson in the Manillias. And that they report an English
shipp was cast away on the coast of China the last monson, and that 30
of the men are in the Portingalles hands at Amacou. Soe I dowbt it is
the _Unicorne_, or else it may be the English ship called the _Hope_,
or a small penisse which was sett out from Pattania in company of the
_Royale James_ the last yeare. Also others have letters that our
fleete at Manillas have taken 5 China junckes; others report more, and
that they have taken a Portingall galliota.

_June 21_ (_Gonguach 12_).--I sent ij barrs plate to the ij companis
of dansing beares or _caboques_.

_June 22_ (_Gonguach 13_).--We had 6 carpenters, 82 laborers, 5
plasterars, and 2 masons, and 3 tilors, for the howse.

We dyned at Tayemon Donos, the master carpenter, where we had good
entertaynment, with dansing beares.

_June 23_ (_Gonguach 14_).--We had 2 carpenters, 70 laborers, 5           171
plasterars, and 2 masons, for the howse.

I receved a letter from Pasquall Benito, dated in Nangasaque
yisterday, accompanid with a Duch letter directed to Capt. Leonard
Campes, which came from Camboja, wherin he is advized that the news
theare is that 40 seale of shipps came the last yeare out of England
and Holland for the Indies, to passe by Cape Bona Speranza, and that
30 seale were prepared to com out of Spaine same way. Also a small
galliota is arived at Nangasaque which came from Manillias, and is com
emptie. Soe it is thought she is a theefe run away from Spaniard to
seek purchases.

And we receved tymber at Cochie.

_June 24_ (_Gonguach 15_).--We had 64 laborers, 5 plasterars, and i
mason, for howse.

We fownd the greate ancor, lost when the _James Royall_ went out; and
paid for finding it 5 bars plate.

And Bonga Samma sent me a leane pork for a present.

_June 25_ (_Gonguach 16_).--We had 5 carpenters, 85 laborers, 5
plasters, and i mason, for the howse.

And we have news that Itamia Migell Donos junck is retorned to
Nangasaque, and hath lost her voyage.

_June 26_ (_Gonguach 17_).--We had news that the China Capt. junck is
arived from Tonkyn, which staid theare the last monson, now arivd at
Nangasaque.

_June 27_ (_Gonguach 18_).--We had 5 carpenters and 63 laborers.

I rec. a letter from Itamia Migell Deno, dated in Nangasaque the 13th
of _Gonguach_, wherein he writes me of the losse of his voyadg, and
that he will come hym selfe and bring me my _goshon_ before it be
longe.

And Oyen Dono, with an other cavelero, cam to thenglish howse, sent
from Tonomon Samma, Semi Dono, and Taccamon Dono, to warne us, when
our shiping came in, that our marenars walked not ashore with weapons
or _catanes_.

_June 28_ (_Gonguach 19_).--I receved a letter from China Capt., dated    172
in Nangasaque 18th _Gonguach_, of his arivall theare and of the junck
com from Tonkyn, but that his factor he sent is left behind, and a new
small junck retornd in place of ould. Also that he understandes our 9
shipps are arived in the bay of Manillias, and have taken ij China
junkes, and that few adventure now to that parte for feare of us and
the Hollanders; and that the ould Emperor of China and his sonne are
dead, and thempire com to a yong man, his sonns sonne.

_June 29_ (_Gonguach 20_).--I rec. a letter from Pasquali, dated in
Nangasaque 2 daies past, wherin he writes me that the admerall of
thenglish hath cut affe the head of an English capt. in the Manillias,
and hanged 5 other English men; and that the _Unecorne_ was cast away
upon the coast of China, and that Furbeshar, the carpenter, his wife,
and maid, are prisoners at Amacow. These news the friggat or galliota,
which cometh from the Manillias, hath brought. And that the galliota
of the capt. more, which went for Manillias, is cast away, but Alvaro
Munos arived in safetie; and that they are making ready a good fleete
of shipps and gallis at Manillias. But I esteem it all fables of
puting to death of a capt. and 5 others at Manillias.

About nowne there came one runing from the Hollands howse, and brought
news that 4 shipps, English and Hollanders, weare arived on this
coast, neare to Cochie Roade. Soe Mr. Eaton and Mr. Osterwick went out
on horsback by land to see what it was; and sowne after Capt. Specks
and Capt. Camps followed. God send us good and profitable news.

And sowne after came news that ij English and i Duch shipp weare
arived and at an ancor in Cochie; whereof I sent word to Tonomon
Samma, Bonga Samma, Semi Dono, and Taccamon Dono, per our _jurebasso_.
And soone after arived ashore Mr. Cockram and Mr. Tubervill, and
brought news all the fleete of 9 shipps, both English and Duch,           173
were arived at Chochie, and that they had taken 5 China junckes in
all.

_June 30_ (_Gonguach 21_).--I went abord the shipps, where, after my
arivall, there fell debate ashore betwixt English and Duch marrenars.
Soe one Hollander was slane and divers others hurt, both English and
Duch, espetially 2 Englishmen. So the admerell called a councell,
where it was determined to seek out the murtherers or strife makers on
both partes, and to punish them with death or otherwais, according to
desert. Alsoe it was ordayned to begyn to unlade our shipps on Munday,
Mr. Cockram to be at Hollandes house to take acco. of all landed, and
Mr. Balke at English howse, to like effect; and duble lock to be put
on dores till the goodes be vallued and parted.

_July 1_ (_Gonguach 22_).--Notwithstanding the orders taken by
councell that nether English nor Hollander should goe ashore with
weopens, to prevent quarreling, yet the Hollanders flocked on shore
with swordes and _cattans_ and sett upon our unarmed men and slew one
and hurt divers others; and, as it is said, are alowed and sett one
per Comander Jonson, vizadmerall.

_July 2_ (_Gonguach 23_).--We receved ashore this day ij boates lading
of prize goodes, being 131 fardelles and chistes, great and small, but
I know not what is in them; and put duble lockes on the dore of the
gedonge, both of ours and the Hollanders. Allsoe we receved iij boates
ladinges priz goodes, landed at Hollandes howse out of their shiping,
and put into their gedong under double lock likewais, being 225
fardels and chistes, whereof ij boates lading came out of the ship
_Bantam_.

And towardes night Capt. Adams, Capt. Clevengar, and Capt. Lennis came
ashore to English howse, and Comander Johnson to Hollandes howse, to
seek out all the marrenars, English and Duch, and to send them abord,     174
to keepe them from brawling.

_July 3_ (_Gonguach 24_).--We receved prize goodes ashore out of the
Duch shipp _Bantam_.

_July 4_ (_Gonguach 25_).--We rec. prize goodes out of _Moone_ and
_Bantam_.

_July 5_ (_Gonguach 26_).--An Englishman of the _Elizabeths_ company,
being drunk, much abused hym selfe and drue his _cattan_ against the
Japons, but they took it from hym and drubd hym sore, and I think had
kild hym, yf I had not taken hym out of their handes and sent hym
abord.

_July 6_ (_Gonguach 27_).--I sent ij drunken Englishmen abord the
_Moone_, the one called Gray, a calker, for misusing the admerell in
ill termes, as many witnesses heard.

Mr. Henry Smith, purcer of the _Royal James_, had a child by a Japon
woamon, and was christned this day per Mr. Arthur Hatch, prechar, per
the name of Henry; Mr. Joseph Cockram and Mr. Wm. Eaton, godfathers,
and Maria, Mr. Sayers woaman, godmother.

_July 7_ (_Gonguach 28_).--The admerall, Capt. Robt. Adames, with the
rest of the English comanders, came ashore to thenglish howse at
Firando and satt in councell about the murthering of a Hollander by an
English man, called John Peterson: viz. Robert Adames, Charles
Clevenger, Edmond Lennis, Jno. Munden, Arnold Browne, seamen; Joseph
Cockram, Wm. Eaton, Edmond Sayer, Jno. Osterwick, Ric. Cocks, English
merchantes; with Mr. Vaux, a Hollander, whoe spoke English, to be
enterpreter or heare what 4 Duchmen aledged against John Roane, the
murtherer of Jno. Peterson, whoe all 4 with viva voce accused the said
Roan to doe the acte in their sight, and stabed hym into the leaft
brest and soe to the hart (with a knife), that he never spoke word but
fell downe dead, the wound after being seene and serched by Mr. Owen
and Mr. Eaton, chirurgions, whoe saw the corps taken out of growne 3
daies after it was buried.

The jurie empaneled weare named as followeth, viz.:--                     175

  _Eliza._
    Robert Turbervill, foreman,
    Wm. Morgon,
    John Goulding,
  _Bull._
    Ric. Wattes,
    Wm. Legg,
  _Palsgrave._
    Jno. Humphrey,
    Ed. Bates,
    Tho. Harod,
    Bartholomew Ale,
  _Moone._
    Galliard, guner,
    Phillip Okebank,
    Roger Burdok,

And the names of men witnessing against Rone, viz. Jno. Ive, an
Englishman; Derick Harmonson, Duchman; Evert Lubbertson, Duchman; Jno.
Johnson, Duchman; Jno. Henrikson, Duchman; Joyemon Dono, a Japon, in
whose howse it was donne, at Cochie.

_July 8_ (_Gonguach 29_).--The shipp _Elizabeth_ entred the harbor of
Firando this day, without any helpe of boates, and without order ether
from the admerell or capt., and came agrowne, not without greate
danger, yet got afe againe.

_July 9_ (_Roquenguach 1_).--This day Jno. Roan of Bristoll, marrenar,
was condemned by the xij men before nomenated, for killing of Jno.
Peterson, a Duchman, and hanged at the yard arme abord the shipp
_Elizabeth_. He confessed before his death that he kild the said man,
being in drink and not knowing what he did, wishing all the shipps
company to take example by hym, and to beware of woamen and wine,
which had brought hym to that untymely death. He died very resolutely,
and receved the sacrament by Mr. Arthur Hatch befor he went to
execution. Capt. Robt. Adames was forced to put the roape about his
neck with his owne handes, for non of the shipps company would doe it,
yf he should hang them, and soe tould hym to his face.

And we rec. prize goodes out of _Bantam_ and _Hope_.

_July 10_ (_Roquenguach 2_).--We rec. prize goodes ashore out of the
Dutch shipp _Hope_.

_July 11_ (_Roquenguach 3_).--We rec. prize goodes ashore out of Duch     176
_Hope_, and out of ship _Palsgrove_.

_July 15_ (_Roquengach 7_).--Tonomon Samma and Semi Dono sent to us
and the Hollanders, in the Kinges name, to desire us to lend hym xx M.
_taies_ in plate, for a tyme, for that he had marid the Emperors
kinswoaman the 5 of last moone, and will bring her to Firando shortly.

_July 16_ (_Roquenguach 8_).--The Admerall, Capt. Adames, came to
Firando to confer about vizeting the prince and Semi Dono to morrow.

Soe we and the Hollanders did conclude to vizet them to morrow, viz:--

  for Tonomon Samma.
    1 barell Spanish wine
    1 China bason full ginger conserv, poz. 20 _cattis_
    1 China bason full nutmeg conserv
    1 China bason with peper, poz. 11 _cattis_
  for Semi Dono.
    1 barell wine ditto
    1 China bason conserv ginger, poz. 19 _cattis_
    1 ditto with peper, poz. 11 _cattis_

_July 17_ (_Roquenguach 9_).--We went and deliverd our presentes as
before named, and had very frendly entertaynment and taken in good
parte. And the prince caused a helth to be drunk rownd for the good
news of the kinges his brothers marriadg with themperours kinswoaman,
and an other for the safe arivall of our shipps.

_July 21_ (_Roquenguach 13_).--The _tono_ sent word unto us and the
Hollanders that we must carry back our 4 shipps to Cochie, themperour
and his councell soe comanding. Unto whome we answerd, that we brought
them into Firando at their request, not without greate danger, and,
the wind being contrary, could not carry them back againe; and that
within a few daies we ment to goe to themperours court to kisse his
handes, and in the meane tyme, or at least till the king retorned to
Firando, to let them rest as they weare; which they seemed not to be
unwilling to permitt.

Also Semi Dono sent againe both to us and the Hollanders to know          177
whether we would lend the king 20,000 _taies_, as he formerly
requested. Unto which we retorned answer that first we must pay the
debtes we owed, and then furnish our shiping with the needfull, and
afterwardes, yf we had an overplus, we weare ready to serve his
Highnesse in what with reason we might doe.

_July 22_ (_Roquenguach 14_).--The _tono_ sent againe both to us and
the Hollanders, to know whether we would lend the king 20,000 _taies_.
Unto whome we made answer, as formerly, that, our debtes being paid
and shipps furnished of the needfull, we then would doe his Highnesse
any lawfull servis we could.

_July 23_ (_Roquenguach 15_).--I went to Cochie to vizet thadmerall,
as also to look upon the new building and to take acco. of tymber. And
I fownd there had byn a broyle there betwixt the Japons and
Hollanders, as the like was at Firando 2 daies past, where a Hollander
stabed or hurt 2 Japons, for which they drubed hym well and took hym
presoner, and keepe hym in durance till this hower, the _tono_ sending
the Hollanders word that he would not suffer hym to be delivered into
their handes, except they would promis before hand to put hym to
death; which the Hollanders answered they could not doe, because he
had kild no Japon, but they would wound hym or cut hym as bad or worse
then he had hurt the Japons. And soe the matter restes till this day.

_July 24_ (_Roquenguach 16_).--I wrot a letter to Capt. Adams,
admerall, to Cochie, per Tobio Dono, to take measure and make the
steares at key.

The unruly marrenars of the Hollandes shipps, being drunk, did ride
over children in the streetes, and slasht and cutt Japons. Whereupon
the justis took two of them presoners, and without any more adoe cut
affe their heades.

And I heard of a Scotsman which ment to run away to Nangasaque, called    178
James Lester. Soe I sent a boate and brought hym back.

_July 25_ (_Roquenguach 17_).--I wrot a letter to Capt. Robt. Adames,
and sent hym Lester, the runaway, to Cochie.

And Matias, the Hollander, and Swagger did arive this day at Firando
from Cochinchina, in a junk which brought them to Nangasaque; and
bring word they met with an English shipp neare Amacou, called the
_Pepercorne_, wherin came merchant Mr. Bugims, that was purcer in the
_Unecorne_ the last yeare, when she was cast away neare Amacou, and
now is bound for this place in the _Pepercorne_, and, as Matias saeth,
is to stay upon the coast of Amacou till the middell of August, before
she com for Japon, to look for bootie. God send her well in. Only I
note it neglegence that they wrot us not word how we should prepare
our selves for busynes to succeade.

_July 26_ (_Roquenguach 18_).--Capt. Camps and my selfe receved
letters this day from themperours court in answer of ours sent per
expres, viz. 1 from Codgsque Dono, that priz frigot was not ended; 1
from King Firando to same effect, and that price of lead was not made;
1 from Torazemon Dono, lardg, how that Emperour had comanded we nor
Hollanders should carry no munition out of the cuntrey, nether any
Japons in our shipp, and that much ill was reported to the Emperour
and his councell against us and the Hollanders, as he could not write
it per letter, but would relate it per word of mouth shortly at his
arivall at Firando.

And towardes night we had newes the shipp _Pepercorne_ was arived at
Cochie roade in Firando. So I sent Mr. Ed. Sayer, Mr. Jno. Osterwick,
and Hary Dodsworth abord with a barill _morofack_, 50 loves fresh
bread, a hogg, 17 hense, 4 fisantes, with redish, cowcomber, and
millons.  But presently after Mr. Morton, the master, with Mr. Bogins,    179
the merchant, and Georg Christmas, purcer, came ashore and brought me
these letters following, viz.:--

  dated 19th Aprill in Jaccatra,
    1 from the precedent Mr. Ric. Fursland
    1 from Mr. Tho. Brockedon

with a note of instructions for orderly keping acco., and 2 broad
cloths, no. 445 and 232, and a bill lading thereof fermed per Georg
Cristmas.

2 letters from Pattania, of 9th and 11th June, verbatum, from Mr. Jno.
Jourdaine.

1 from Sr. Tho. Wilson, dated in London, 17th November, 1619.

_July 27_ (_Roquenguach 19_).--I receved 5 chistes R. 8 ashore out of
the shipp _Pepercorne_, from Jaccatra, from precedent Fursland, per
the handes of Georg Christmas, purcer, should contain 20,000 R. 8, for
which I gave a recept of my hand, with ij broad cloathes.

And heare arived a Hollandes ship, called the _Muyen_ or _Mugon_, from
Jaccatra, wherin Sr. Albartus the Hollander retorned and brought me
these letters following, viz. 1 copie of former rec. per _Pepercorne_,
1 from precedent Mr. Ric. Fursland, dated 20th June, with a relation,
dated the 30th ditto, from the Councell of Defence, that our fleete
shall retorne back this yeare for Manillias, and Wm. Johnson goe for
admerall, and Capt. Robt. Adames vizadmerall.

_July 28_ (_Roquenguach 20_).--Jno. Avery, pursers mate of the ship
_Elizabeth_, died this morning of a wound he receved from a Fleming
called Jno. Johnson van Hamborg.

_July 29_ (_Roquenguach 21_).--We opened chist no. 21, which came in
the _Pepercorne_, in presence of Mr. Bogens, Mr. Eaton, Mr. Sayer, Mr.
Osterwick, Ric. King, and my selfe, and did both tell and way it over,
and ther wanted 2-3/4 R. of 8 in it short of 4,000 R. 8.

The Duch envited admerall Adames and rest of thenglish to dyner this      180
day to Hollandes howse.

_July 30_ (_Roquenguach 22_).--We changed this day R. for plate barrs,
viz.:--

                                            _ta.  m.  co._
  1500 R. 8 to Cushcron Dono, is            1200   0   0
  1062-1/2 R. 8 to Pasquall, is             0850   0   0
  0625 R. 8 to Jno. Portis and Harnando     0500   0   0
  0125 R. 8 to Mr. Hatch, is bars           0100   0   0

_August 1_ (_Roquenguach 24_).--We had a councell or speches about
geving the xvj parte of priz goodes to the marrenars, and that the
admerall and comanders of fleet should geve in securety under their
ferme that the shipps companis would not goe to Manillias this second
tyme without it.

_August 3_ (_Roquenguach 26_).--I delivered j C. _tais_ small plate to
Capt. Robt. Adams, admerall, to pay unto x Japons which went in our
fleet for Manillias, each one x _taies_ per man; their names as
followeth, viz.:--

  in the _Moone_.
    Jenza
    Sanshero
    Cuishti
  in _Bull_.
    Cusa
    Matias
    Goresak
  in _Elizabeth_.
    Tuestro
    Shengro
    Cugero
    Gibatch

_August 4_ (_Roquenguach 27_).--We sould all our silke which came in
the Manillia fleet unto Tozayemon Dono of Sackay, as followeth, viz.:--

  Fine white pole silke, at       310 _tais pico._
  Second sort pole silke, at      285   "    "
  Kense or oylie silke, at        190   "    "
  Sleze silke, at                 225   "    "
  White twisted silke, at         220   "    "
  Blak pole silke, at             220   "    "
  Cullered pole silke, at         290   "    "

But sowne after came news that 3 or 4 galliotas weare arived at           181
Nangasaque from Amacon and had brought much silk and stuffes, and soe
he said he would goe from his bargen, notwithstanding he had geven us
a bill under his hand writing for performance.

The bill of Tozemon Donos to take our silk was made in such sort that
he might take but i _pico_ of a sort, yf he would, for no quantety was
set downe, nether that he should take all. This was donne per
neglegence of Mr. Eaton, that trusted his boy and would not call for a
_jurebasso_.

_August 5_ (_Roquenguach 28_).--Jno. Yossen came to thenglish howse to
begg the life of the Hollander condemned for killing Mr. Avery, but
could not preveale.

_August 6_ (_Roquenguach 29_).--This day, before nowne, the Hollanders
did behead Jno. Johnson van Hamborg, for killing Mr. Avery, 5 or 6
English men standing by at doing theirof; they having first made the
man soe drunk that he could scarse stand on his legges, and soe cutt
affe his head within their owne howse.

We had news for certen this day that 2 galliotas were arived at
Nangasaque from Amacou, with silk and stuffes, and 2 others yet
without to enter.

Also Mr. Christofer Bogans had a letter from a Portugez at Nangasaque,
wherin he wrot hym a long cercomstance how well the men (espetially
the woamen) weare used that escaped out of the shipp _Unicorne_ in
China, when she was cast away; and with what pompe the woamen weare
receaved; with many other Portingall lies. Others also wrot that 14
China juncks, 6 Portingall friggottes, arived at Manillias after our
fleete was departed from thence, soe that now both silk wares and all
other provition of munition and victuell[100]

     [100] The sentence unfinished.

_August 7_ (_Roquenguach 30_).--The _Bulls_ company wholy mutyned, and
36 of them came to Firando and deliverd a writing unto me, wherin they
demanded their 16th parte of priz goods. And, after, Capt. Adames,        182
admerall, wrote me to take one James Martin, a Scotsman, yf he came to
Firando, and lay hym in irons. This Scott is he which stured up the
_Bulls_ men to muteny, promising to perswade the _Moons_ men to doe
the like and to follow them, "because" (said he) "they sell away the
goods, and, yf yow suffer them to carry them away, yow shall never
have any thing".

_August 10_ (_Sitinguach 3_).--We had a jenerall counsell this day at
the English howse, both of English and Hollanders, where it was
ordayned that the Duch should carry the flag in the meane topp, as
admerall, this second voyage for Manillias, and the English as
vizadmerall. But Capt. Robt. Adams, admerall the former voyadg,
aledged he was free per meanes of a letter he brought out of England,
and soe ment to resigne his place to Capt. Chorles Cleavenger and
retorne for Jaccatra. Unto whome it was objected that, yf he shronke,
it was a bad precedent to make all the rest doe the like. Unto which
he replied that, rather then that should happen, he would goe meanest
man in the fleete; yet that he would not put out the flagg in the fore
topp for 3 or 4 daies space, and in the meane tyme would take adviz
what was best to doe. And soe Jno. Jonson was ordayned admerall, to
put out his flagg in the meane top to morrow; and that the Councell of
Defences ordenances should be read abord all the fleete to morow; and
a muster taken how many men their were, and soe to know each mans
opinion, what he would replie against these proceadinges.

Also it was brought in question at the same councell, tuching the
abuse of one           , master of the shipp _Swan_ and on of the
Councell of War, how he per force did enter per night into the 5th
junck taken, with som 40 or 50 men with weopens and close lantarns,
and, after the beating and misusing of the Englishmen which had
pocession, did pilledg and sett the junk on fire, leaveing the English    183
men in her to be burned, yf they hadd nott byn releeved. Unto which
Jno. Johnson, the admerall, replied that our men had used other abuses
to his men. Which, in the end, was remitted till they came to the
Councell of Defence at Jaccatra.

_August 11_ (_Sitinguach 4_).--This day Jno. Johnson was made admerall
both of Duch and English, and proclemation made abord each shipp, both
Duch and English, and all presoners sett at libertie for any muteny
hertofore, the Duch at request of Capt. Adams and the English at
request of Jno. Johnson, admerall.

China Capt. went to Nangasaque, and Andreas with hym, to bring about
the China Capt. junck, to carine our shipps by.

_August 12_ (_Sitinguach 5_).--Gonrok Dono passed by this place to
Nangasaque, and Capt. Leonard Camps and my selfe went to hym about
priz of our leade, and he, being ready to departe, willed us to follow
hym to Nangasaque.

_August 13_ (_Sitinguach 6_).--Capt. Robt. Adames, our late admerall
of the English and Duch fleete to the Manillias, now made vizadmerall,
called a councell of these following, viz.: Capt. Chorles Cleavengar,
Capt. Edmond Lennis, Mr. Jno. Munden, Mr. Arnold Browne, seamen;
Joseph Cockram, Wm. Eaton, Ric. Cocks, merchantes--wherein he desired
to be dismissed from going vizadmerall this second tyme to Manillas,
shewing a discharg from our Right Honble. Company in England, being
permitted to retorne for England per first shipp which came; yet, in
respect the Councell of Defence had now made a second chose of hym (he
striving to put it to Capt. Chorles Clevengar), yet we all in generall
put it upon hym, which he in the end condecended unto, to put out his
flagg in the fore tope to morrow morning.

Yt was agreed per us and the Hollanders that to morow morning Capt.
Speck and another Hollander, with Mr. Cockram and my selfe, should        184
goe for Nangasaque to morow, to make an end about price of our lead,
as also to provide any thing wanting to geve to the Emperour and
Councell for presentes.

_August 14_ (_Sitinguach 7_).--We agreed with Cushcron Dono and the
oyleman for these parcelles following, viz:--

  300 _pico_ biskit, at 4 _ta._ 4 _ma._ 5 _co._ per _pico_.
  600 sackes fyne rize of 40 _gantas_, as Duch pay.
  100 _pico_ hempe, at 7 _ta._ 7 _m._ 5 _co._ _pico_.

for ships provition, to be deliverd within 3 mo. after date.

Also agreed with Nicolas Martin for these parcels, viz.:--

  200 _pico_ biskit, at price abovesaid.
  030 buttes rack, containing 10,000 _gantes_, at 2 _gantes mas_ bar.

And I paid j C. _tais_ to Yoshozemon Dono, our beefe man, upon acco.
of beeves, whereof he paid unto Gennemon Dono, the other beefe man, 47
_tais_ for 19 beeves, at 3 _tais_ beefe.

_August 15_ (_Sitinguach 8_).--I paid out in barr plate to purcers,
viz.:--

                                                   _ta.  m.  c._
  j C. _tais_ to Mr. Neve, purcer of _Moone_        100   0   0
  j C. _tais_ to Mr. Watts, purcer of _Bull_        100   0   0
  l. _taies_ to Danill White, purcer of _Palsgrove_ 050   0   0
  l. _taies_ to Christmas, purcer of _Pepercorne_   050   0   0

And I paid the glover shewmaker, for 4 peare of pompes at ij _mas_ per
peare, 8 _m._; more to hym for a _cattan_ handell red lether, 2 _m._

_August 16_ (_Sitinguach 9_).--I embarked this morning, in company of
Mr. Cockram and Ric. King, to goe towardes Nangasaque, as Capt. Camps
and Mr. Vaux did the like, to speake with Gonrok Dono about receving
money for our lead. But, at our first seting out, fell much rayn; soe
we, being in an open bark, retorned back againe.

We agreed or bargened for these provitions following for Manillia
fleete, viz. with the gunfounders, for 5,000 _gantas_ ordnary _rak_,
at ij _gantas_ per _mas_, to be delivered within 3 monthes; with          185
Oyen Dono and his sonne, for 10,000 _gantas_ redd _garvanse_, at 4-1/4
_gantas_ per _mas_.

_August 17_ (_Sitinguach 10_).--We set forwardes towardes Nangasaque
this morning after sun rising, and arived theare the same day 2 howres
before sunne seting, and fownd Capt. Camps and the Duch arived theare
at midnight before.

_August 18_ (_Sitinguach 11_).--We and the Hollanders sent our
_jurebassos_ to Gonrok Dono and Feze Dono, to tell them of our arivall
heare, and that we desired to com and kisse their handes when they
weare at leasure.

And we laid out presentes, viz.:--

  for Gourok Dono, governor.
    02 _tattamis_ stamet cloth
    20 _cattis_ white raw pole silk
    03 peces diaper tabling
    25 _cattis_ of pepper
    03 peces sleze land
  for Feze Dono, major.
    01 _tattamy_ stamet cloth
    10 _cattis_ white pole silk
    03 pec. diaper napkening
  for Skidayen Dono, secretary.
    01 _tatta._ stamet cloth
    03 peces diaper napkening
    03 pec. wroght sattins, cullers
  for Yasimon Dono.
    03 peces cullard taffeties
    02 peces ordenary damasks

And I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton, to Firando, per Andrea Dono in China
Capt. junck, with vj peeces iron ordinance and carages for them, and
how I paid xxv _tais_ plate barrs to hym.

Within night Lansman the Duchman came to vizet me, for by day he durst
not, for feare of the excomunecation, telling me it was defended that
noe Roman Catholick might open their mouth to speak to us.

_August 19_ (_Sitinguach 12_).--We went to vizet Gonrok Dono with the
present nomenated yistarday, and he of hymselfe began to speake about
the price of the leade, telling us that the Councell thought iiij
_taies_ per _pico_ enough, and therefore he durst not presume to geve
more. Unto which we answered that themperour might take it for            186
nothing, yf he pleased, yet we knew it was in his Lordshipps handes to
sett what price he pleased; and, seeing Ogosha Samma of famos memory
sett the price at vj _taies_ per _pico_, to take all which came at
that price, and Shongo Samma his sonne, the Emperour that now is, did
conferme it, we hoped his Lordshipp would have consideration thereof,
and the rather, for that we hadd now byn driven affe a yeare and a
halfe, and could not make benefite of our good nor monies, but weare
forced to take up money at interest. And, to conclud, we tould him he
hym selfe did offer 4-1/2 _taies_ per _pico_ the yeare past; yet it
seemed he did not remember the same. And soe, being late, we departed
and left it to his Lordshipps consideration till to morrow to think
better thereof.

And soe we went to Skidayen Dono, his secretary, and carid hym the
present nomenated before, desyring hym to put his master in mind to
end the acco. of lead.

Within night Nicolas Marin, an Italian and pilot to the Portugezes,
came to vizet me, because he durst nott doe it per day, and tould me
how all weare excomunecated that did ether buy or sell with thenglish
or Hollanders, or had any conversation with them, or did soe much as
put affe their hattes or salute them in the streetes.

_August 20_ (_Sitinguach 13_).--I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton, and sent
it per Mangusque, Zazabra Donos servant, advizing how Gonrok offerd us
now but 4 _tais pico._ for our lead, as also of the difference betwixt
Gonrok with the Japon merchantes against the Portugezes, about the
quantety of silk com in the friggates, and how he makes _pancado_ of
stuffes now as well as of silke. And I wished Mr. Eaton to sell away
our silk, yf possibly he could, for it is said there is neare j M.
_pico._ com in these friggots.

And we carid our presentes to Feze Dono and Yasimon Dono, as is noted
downe the 18th present, and desired them to be a meanes to Gonrok         187
Dono to make an end of the price of the leade, or to tell as what we
should trust unto.

The Hollanders supped with us at China Capt. and have envited us to
dynner to their lodging to morow.

_August 21_ (_Sitinguach 14_).--We sent to Gonrok Dono to know his
answer at what price he would set our leade. Soe he replied he would
geve us 4-1/2 _taies_, upon condition we would geve hym a bill of our
handes that, yf the Emperour and Councell weare not content to geve so
much, we should let it goe for lesse. Unto which both the Hollanders
and we answerd that we would com to a sett price, were it at 4-1/2 or
otherwais; the which he took in such snuffe as he sent our present
back againe to Hollandes lodging.

And I delivered an other letter to Yasobro, Tayemon Donos wives
brothers servant, advising how Gonrok Dono had retorned a flatt answer
he would geve but 4 _taies_ per _pico_ for lead, as also of arivall of
the junck from Manillia wherein Wyamon Dono went capt., and that all
was lies of 14 junckes and 6 friggats which arived after our fleete
came away.

This after nowne the junck, wherein Wyamon Dono went for Manillia with
Capt. Adams _goshon_, is now retorned to Faconda roade, and Migell com
ashore with news they have made a very badd voyage, and that they were
badly used per the Spaniardes, miscalling them because they were
frendes to the English and Duch. They also report that, after our
fleete came from Manillias, noe junckes entred theare [with exception]
of only 3 emptie ons which our fleet set at libertie, haveing rifeled
them; as also ij friggates arived theare and went in on the back side
of Manillias for feare of our fleete.

_August 22_ (_Sitinguach 15_).--This day entred an other galliota from
Amacou, which was 17 daies in way, and bringeth silke, silk stuffes,
and black clo., or matta of cotton.

_August 23_ (_Sitinguach 16_).--I wrot a letter to Mr. Eaton and rest,    188
how we could not agree with Gonrok Dono about our lead, with other
occurrantes; but, after, we came to agreement at 4-1/2 _cattis pico_
lead.

Manillia junck of Wyamon Dono arived at Nangasaque; and they report
that all Japons must be banished out of Manillias and non traffick
theare hearafter.

_August 24_ (_Sitinguach 17_).--The Hollanders and we went to take our
leaves of Gonrok Dono and would have left the present with Skidayen
Dono, his secretary, but he would not receve it, telling us Gonrok
would be at Firando before it weare long, and then might we better
present it theare. Also Gonrok tould us he would send men to Firando
to way out the lead and pay our money theare forthwith.

And soe, towardes night, the Hollanders departed towardes Firando on a
sudden, we having formerly agreed to goe togeather to morow morning.

  And I receved a letter from Mr. Eaton at Firando, howe
    he had sould 1188 _cattis_ white twisted silke more to
    Tozemon Dono, at 22 _mas catty_ is                      2601 5  0

  Also 1200 deare skins to Tobio Dono,
    best sort, at 34 _tais_ per cento, is                   0408 0  0

  And delivered 15 Russia hides to Feze
    Dono, at 3 _tais_ hide, is                              0045 0  0

_August 25_ (_Sitinguach 18_).--I receved 2 letters from Firando,
viz., 1 from Mr. Osterwick, 1 from Mr. Eaton, with a coppie of ij
letters from Molucos from thenglish agent.

_August 26_ (_Sitinguach 19_).--We departed this morning towardes
Firando, and paid out for diett whilst we were theare        27  0  0

  To the goodwife for howsroome                              04  3  0
  To the servantes                                           03  2  5

And stuffes given for presentes, viz. 1 pec. black chaul taffety to       189
Capt. Whows sonne, 1 pec. ditto to China Capt. doughter, 1 pec. ditto
to Augustyns sonne.

And we went to Setto to bed, wind being contrary, and staid all night;
and paid charges 1 _ta._, and to his ij childron that brought present
of fish and pompians 2 _mas_.

_August 27_ (_Sitinguach 20_).--About midnight we arived at Firando,
where we found a Duch shipp _Amsterdam_ entred, she coming in on the
north side of the iland, and was driven to Nanguay in Crates; and
there the Hollanders falling at debate with the Japons of Crates, they
fell together by the eares on shore, and 1 Hollander was kild and
divers others hurt, and the Japons went not skot free.

_August 28_ (_Sitinguach 21_).--The King of Firando arived heare this
day at nowne from the cort of Edo; and we went out in a boate and met
hym, as the Duch did the like, and they shott affe store of ordinance
both from howse and abord shipps; but all our ordinance weare ashore,
the shipps being on carine, soe I sent Mr. Cockram with a _jurebasso_
to bidd his Highnesse welcom, and to exckews the not shouting
ordinance, which he took in good parte as well as yf we had shott.

_August 29_ (_Sitinguach 22_).--I receved a bill from Tozemon Dono for
i C. xxviij pec. Canton damask of deceased Capt. Adams acco., at ij
_tais_ per peec., to be paid in bar plate at demand, is ij C. lvj
_tais_.

And I rec. a letter from the domine of the Duch ship _Amsterdam_,
dated at Mallayo in Molucas the 26th July last past, sent from Mr. Wm.
Nicolas, agent; wherin he doth write of the indirect dealing of the
Hollanders against our honble. emploiers.

And there was iiij C. peeces manta, or cotton clo., delivered to Mr.
Jno. Neve, purcer of the shipp _Moone_, for shipps use, viz. 330 peces
browne cangas, 70 peces light blews.

_August 30_ (_Sitinguach 23_).--We went to vizet the King of Firando,     190
both we and the Hollanders, and carid hym a present of ij _barricos_
of Spanish wine, 1/2 a _pico_ of cloves, and 1/2 a _pico_ of peper.
The wine he took, but the rest he refused. He urged very much to have
Capt. Speck to goe to Edo this yeare, in respect he was well knowne to
themperour and his Councell, as also thenglish had need to send one
that knew the orders of Japan, for that we had many enemis at Court
per means of the Portingales and Spaniardes and their well willars
which weare many. Unto which we answerd that we would take councell
about the matter and have in remembrance what his Highnesse had made
knowne unto us.

We envited the Hollanders admerall, merchantes, and all the rest of
princepalles to dyner after to morow, being Sattarday; but the
admerall, Wm. Johnson, denied.

_August 31_ (_Sitinguach 24_).--Tonoman Samma, the kinges brother,
sent for Capt. Camps and me in all hast, to speake with hym; which we
did; and was to put us in mynd both from the king his brother as also
of hymselfe that, at any hand, we should keep Capt. Speck heare this
yeare to goe up to Edo to themperour, as also to be a meanes to end
other [things].

_September 1_ (_Sitinguach 25_).--Wm. Johnson, thadmerall, with all
the cheefe of the Hollanders, came to dynner this day, and supped with
us likewies. And we hadd the _caboques_ after dynner.

And Unagense Dono sent me ij _catabras_ for a present, i of silke, and
the other lynen cloth.

Also the justis, Taccamon Dono, sent us word to geve over making
_gallegalle_[101] in our howse we hired of China Capt., because the
white lyme did trowble the player or singing man, next neighbour. Soe
we were forced to doe it, notwithstanding it cost us xx _taies_ to
build that howse, and soe to make and hier a new one in an other place.

The report is that Bonga Dono is dead, and that he died the day before    191
the kinges arivall; and yett it is not published till the feasting be
past for joy of the kinges marriadg and his safe retorne.

     [101] Hindustani: _galgal_, mortar made of lime and linseed oil.

_September 2_ (_Sitinguach 26_).--The king sent to Semi Dono to
signefie unto hym my answer tuching Capt. Speck, that I agreed with
hym that it was fitting he should stay this yeare, and goe for Edo
about these busynes. Soe Semi Dono sent me word to contynew in that
opinion, for that it was good and profitable to both companis.

_September 3_ (_Sitinguach 27_).--A Portugez, called Ranelles, came
from Nangasaque, offering his service to goe in our fleete, telling me
that Lopas Sermiente Caravalle, the new capt. more, had misused hym
without occation; yet I suspect him to be a spie sent to see what we
doe.

_September 4_ (_Sitinguach 28_).--We went to the king, being sent for,
both the Hollanders and us, where he made known to us a writing sent
from themperor and his Councell, that no stranger should buy any
slaves, ether men or woamen, to send them out of the cuntrey, nether
carry out any armor, _cattans_, lances, _langanantes_, poulder or
shott, or guns; nether any Japon marrenars to goe in our shipping.

And we were envited to dyner abord the Duch shipp _Amsterdam_, where
we wanted no drink.

_September 5_ (_Sitinguach 29_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to Cochie to
know wherefore the kinges _bongew_ would not permitt our tymber and
boardes to be landed at our howse, as also what he ment to take ij of
our men presoners upon no occation. And he retorned me answer, he did
not forbid the landing of our tymber, but only gave his men charge
(per order from the king) to serch all the barks which came into
Cochie, for to see whether they brought any armor, weapons, or
munition (thinges defended per the Emperour), which might be brought
in boates under tymber or boardes as well as otherwais. And tuching       192
our two men, the one being charged with stealing of a knife, as he
confesseth, but the Japans burthen hym with stealing of money, and the
other for the bad handling of a woaman great with child, whereby she
cast her child; "yet", said he, "I make acco., yf yow speake but one
word to Semi Dono, he will sett them free".

Also oure marenars of the shipp _Pepercorne_ through their neglegence
sett a hodd of stuffe or pitch on fire, which had like to have burned
all our howsing and the towne of Cochie, and burned us som 50 trees or
rownd tymbers of 2, 3, and 4 _tais_ per peece.

And I sent the _caboques_ ij barrs plate, containing vij _taies_, for
playing when the Hollanders weare heare.

_September 6_ (_Fatinguach 1_).--I paid to the _maky_ man, Canzemon
Dono of Miaco, i C. xxxvj-1/2 _tais_ plate bars for these parcells
_maky_, viz.:--

                                                         _ta.  m.  co._
  5 _maky_ basons and ewers Japon fation, at 8 _tais_
    pees                                                  40   0   0
  1 ditto with ewer, with duble handell, at               09   0   0
  6 _macky_ posset pottes (or boles) with covers, at 4
    _tais_                                                24   0   0
  6 peare playing tables with men, at 7 _tais_ peare      42   0   0
  5 black basons and ewers Japon fation, at 2-1/2 _tais_
    pes                                                   12   5   0
  1 ditto with ewer and duble handell, at                 03   0   0
  6 black posset bolles with covers, at 1 _tay_ pe.       06   0   0

_September 7_ (_Fatchinguach 2_).--I went to Semi Dono, Mr. Cockram
and Mr. Bogens accompanying me, to desire hym our ij Englishmen might
be sett at libertie, which they comanded us to keepe in preson, we
having greate occation to use them in our shiping this faire wether,
and that they were accused of mier mallice, becase a Japon was taking
of suspition for killing an Englishman; but, for that Japon, we left
it to his Lo. pleasure to make ferther proofe, as he pleaced, for that
we could say noe more then we hadd donne. Also I desired that we          193
might be discharged of the Japon theefe we tooke stealing the hoopes
of iron affe our cask; unto which he answered we weare best to make
the matter knowne unto Tonomon Dono, unto whome he was ready then to
goe, and to sett all downe in writing; which we did.

The one side of the _Palsgrove_ was wholie sheathed this day from the
keele to the bend.

_September 8_ (_Fatchinguach 3_).--I rec. a letter from Gonrok Dono to
way out the lead to his men per whome he sent the letter.

I delivered into the factory, for presentes for themperour, 72
_cattis_ white twisted silk at 220 _tais pico_, 158: 4: 0; 59 _cattis_
white pole or Lankin silk at 285 _ta. pico_, 168: 1: 5.

Gonrok Donos men, with the King of Firandos _bongews_, came to look on
our lead; and on Munday morning will begin to way.

_September 9_ (_Fatchinguach 4_).--At nowne the king sent for me in
all hast to com to hym; which I did, accompanied with Mr. Edward
Sayer; where we fownd he had prepared a _jurebasso_ which spoake
Spanish. The reason he tould me was, for that he dowbted our other
_jurebassos_ did not well understand what he had formerly said, in
respeckt we had not resolved hym in all this tyme whether we
determened to keepe Capt. Speck this yeare to goe for Edo with others
of our nation which knew the order of Japon and were knowne to
themperour and his Councell, but to the contrary lett the Spaniardes
and Portingales goe before us, whoe were our enemies, as all the
merchants of Nangasaque and Miaco were the like, soe that we had no
frend soe sure in Japon to trust unto as he was; and, yf we would not
beleeve his councell, we might doe as we list, for the falt was not in
hym. Unto which I made answer his Highnes had reason, but that I was
not in falt; and that he might know, yf it pleaced hym to let his         194
_jurebasso_ goe with me to the Hollandes howse to heare their answer.
Which he was contented, and withall bad me tell the Duch admerall,
with Capt. Camps and Capt. Speck, that, yf Capt. Speck staid not
heare, he held them all 3 for enemies to the English and Hollands
affares. The which I made knowne to the admerall Johnson, Capt. Camps,
Capt. Speck, and the rest; but it seemed they 2 former made light of
it, yet answerd they would call a generall councell to morow and speak
of that and other matters. The which I certefid the king of per the
said _jurebasso_, Nicolas Martin.

Also our ij men which were in preson were now sett at libertie. Yet
thadmerall, Capt. Adames, sent them abord the ship _Moone_, to geve
them exemplary punishment, because they might remember it another
tyme; for out of dowbt som abuse their was, otherwais the Japons would
not have laid handes on them.

_September 10_ (_Fatchinguach 5_).--We had a generall councell this
day at Duch howse, where it was concluded that 10 shipps this yeare
shall procead againe to the Manillias, to be ready to departe by the
xxth of November next, ould stile. But that ij of them shall goe out
before, within this 15 or 20 daies, viz. the _Bull_ and the _Moyen_,
to stay upon the coast of China to look out for junckes, till the
other 8 com after to the place apointed them to stay; but yf, in the
meane tyme, stormie wether drive them away, then to meete them at
Manillias, at a place apointed and tyme.

Also it was debated to have Capt. Speck stay this yeare and goe for
Edo as the king desired. But the Duch admerall, Capt. Camps, Capt.
Lefevre, and the rest would not consent thereunto, saying it la not in
their power to doe it, he being sent for by their presedent and
generall at Jaccatra; but Capt. Speck spoke openly that the Hollanders
gave it out that this was a formed matter made betwixt the King of        195
Firando, Capt. Speck, and my selfe, to have hym stay heare an other
yeare, without any occation or need at all. Which for my parte I
protest before God they doe bely me; for I did speake to have hym to
stay heare only to content the King of Firando, and for nothing else,
because he was soe important with me and others about it. Soe there
was nothing donne about going up to themperour. Of the which I advized
the King of Firando what the Hollanders answer was, which gave hym
small content, for he answerd that we should find his wordes true,
that he gave us good councell, and that it would be to late hereafter
to amend it, and therefore we should not empute the falt his.

_September 11_ (_Fatchinguach 6_).--We began to way out our lead this
day per single _piculls_, and geve in each _pico._ a _catty_.

And it should seeme the king being discontent because Capt. Speck
stayeth not in Japon this yeare, for he sent to the Hollandes howse to
seeke for pikes that were made ready to send for Jaccatra and weare
carid abord a shipp. But the king comanded they should be brought
ashore againe, although Capt. Camps aledged they were bought the yeare
past, before themperours edict came out; yet that would not serve, but
they must be unladed againe.

Also it seemed he was angry with us, for he gave order that our
laborers, which wrought about carining our shipps, should geve over
work, and banished a Japon of Nangasaque which we had entertayned to
be overseer of the work. But at my request our laborars were permitted
to work as before.

And we waied out 92 _pico._ lead this day to themperours _bongews_.

_September 12_ (_Fatchinguach 7_).--One of the _Eliza._ men, called
Gabrell           , a plot maker, being drunk, fell overbord and was
drowned.

The King sent Torazemon Dono and other ij of his noble men to tell me     196
he was enformed that, at my being at Nangasaque, I had bought a greate
quantety of gunpouder, to be secretly conved abord our shipps at
Cochie, under culler of other matters. Unto which I answered, I had
bought non, nether did ever speake word to any man about it, as before
God I did not. Soe it seemed they were content with my answer, and
promised me to relate the truth to the king and to get Jacobe Dono,
our boteswaine, released, he being banished, per order from the king,
by the spitfull dealinges of the _bongews_ at Cochie.

I went to the Duch howse with Mr. Cochram to know wherefore they were
noe forwarder in sending up to themperour; and Capt. Camps tould me
the comander Johnson held matters back.

_September 13_ (_Fatchinguach 8_).--We had much a doe with the
_bongews_ which waid out our lead, we having waid out above 800
_pico._ these 3 daies past, they leving it still in our howse, not
carying any away, soe that now all our void howsroome was full; and
they would have me emptie our shipp provition out of our store roome
to geve them place, which I tould them I would not doe.

_September 14_ (_Fatchinguach 9_).--We had a generall councell this
day, wherin we protested against Wm. Johnson, admerall, yf he sent
away Capt. Speck, the King of Firando being soe ernest to stay hym
heare to goe to Edo, in default whereof wee all protested against hym
and his partakers, yf in case any hinderance or domage did happen to
either Company, and sent it to the Duch howse per Mr. Eaton, Joseph
Cockram, Mr. Ed. Sayer, and Mr. Nicolas Bogens, who heard it read in
presence of the said Wm. Johnson, admerall, Capt. Lefevre, and Capt.
Camps, with others; but Jonsons answer was that it was ordayned per a
generall councell that Capt. Speck must goe for Jaccatra in the
_Sunne_, and goe he should.

_September 15_ (_Fatchinguach 10_).--I went to the king, accompanied      197
with Mr. Eaton and Mr. Cockram, to signefie the protest we had made
against the Duch admerall, Wm. Johnson, for not staying Capt. Speck
this yeare in Firando; the which the king said was well donne and
desired a coppie thereof and tould us, seeing the Hollanders made soe
light a reconyng therof, he would perforce stay Capt. Speck heare till
he had order from the Emperours court (or councell) whether he should
stay or goe, and would forthwith send an expres to know their honors
pleasure therein; and in the meane tyme wished us to send up som
others with the present to themperour and councell, and that I should
stay heare with Capt. Speck to take councell about the disposing of
the friggat when Gonrok Dono came.

And soone after the king sent for Capt. Camps, asking hym, as he did
me, what was concluded about Capt. Speck staying. Unto which he made
answer that he and the rest of the merchant[s] had donne what they
could, but that the comander, Wm. Johnson, would not permit it; and
that now Capt. Speck answerd he would not stay upon any termes, but
procead for Jaccatra, and soe he sent word to the king. Soe he,
perceving how matters went, tould Capt. Camps he could not goe up to
themperour till he had made an end about the friggat and we proved the
Jesuistes to be padres or mas pristes, as they terme them, and that
could not be donne till Gonrok Dono came from Nangasaque; yet in the
meane tyme we might embale up our presentes and send ij yong men
before with them to shew our obedience to themperour, and I and Capt.
Camps follow after when the other busynes was donne.

And Albartus came after to the English howse and tould me that in 3
generall councells amongst them selves the most voyces had confermed
Capt. Jacob Specks to stay in Japon this yeare, but Johnson, the
comander, bakt all.

_September 16_ (_Fatchinguach 11_).--We had a comunion this day at        198
English howse adminestered per Mr. Arthur Hatch, prechar of the ship
_Palsgrove_.

Also an Englishman, one of the _Pepercorns_ companie, named Wm.
Barker, having layne on shore 3 wicks, never going abord to look to
ships busines, and being drunk yistarday in a carpentars howse would
have layne with a woaman per force, and against her will took 4 rings
of silvar of her fingars, and drunk 2 _mas_ or xij _d._ in wine, and
in the end would have gon away and pay nothing and carry the rings
along with hym; and, because the good wife of the howse laid handes on
hym, he did beate her. Whereupon the neighbors coming upon hym did
bynd hym, and sent me word therof; and I, going to the howse, fownd
the rings in his pocket, which I restored back againe and made hym pay
the ij _mas_, and brought hym to thenglish howse, where, at the
whiping post, he had first 60 lashes with a whipp, and then washed in
brine, and, after, 40 more lashes.

And after nowne one Beedam, a master mate of the shipp _Elizabeth_,
being drunk, did fall out of the shipps sterne over the reales, 5
fathom hie, and fell into a junck at her side, where he broke his
skull, and is meamed in one legg and an arme and in danger to die.

_September 17_ (_Fatchinguach 12_).--I sould Mr. Munden a rapiar and
daggar for 48 R. 8, with gerdell and hangers all plated over with
silver.

The Hollandes shipp, called the _New Sealand_, arived at Firando in
Cochie roade toward night.

And we waid out 460 _pico._ of lead this day.

And Mr. Eaton, Mr. Osterwick, and my selfe went to the Duch howse,
and, with Capt. Camps, sett downe the presentes to be geven to
themperour and his nobillety, littell more or lesse then it was the
last yeare; as also we had speeches whether it weare fitting to geve
themperours sonne a present, he being at mans estate, and we by
frendes at court put in mynd thereof. Soe we concluded to put in          199
Japon writing the presentes we ment to geve this yeare, and to ask the
King of Firandos councell whether he thought good to have us to add or
deminish any thing therein, as also whether we should geve a present
to the yong prince, themperours sonne, or any other his Highnesse
thought fitting.

We rec. 5000 _taies_ in bar plate, per Gonrok Donos apointment, for
lead.

_September 18_ (_Fatchinguach 13_).--I gave a letter of favor to
Vincent Roman, allius Lansman, for Camboja, dated this day. He is a
Duch man, our frend.

The king sent to tell me that Gonrok Dono had sent a letter in favor
of the capt. more of the Portingales for 3 laskaros which were run
away and abord the Hollanders or us, to have them retorne againe. Unto
which I answerd I knew nothing of any such matter, for I had non in
thenglish howse, yet I would enquere yf ther weare any abord shipp,
and send his Highnesse word.

Also there was a councell to know whether Peter Wadden should goe for
Jaccatra or remeane in the fleet.

_September 19_ (_Fatchinguach 14_).--I paid j M. j C. _tais_ plate
bars unto Cushcron Dono, wherof 1099 _ta._ 7 _m._ 4 _co._ is in full
payment of the fleetes provition the last yeare.

Ould Nobisane, called Bongo Dono, died ij daies past, which was said
to dy before the king arived.

_September 20_ (_Fatchinguach 15_).--The king sent order that we and
the Hollanders should meete this day at Torazemon Donos to confer
about going up to Edo, and that the admerall Johnson should com with
us; but he denid to goe and drove it affe till night, yet then sent
word he would goe in the mornyng.

_September 21_ (_Fatchinguach 16_).--Wm. Johnson, the Duch admerall,
with Capt. Camps, Mr. Ballok, Duchmen, and Capt. Robt. Adams, our
admerall, Mr. Osterwick, and my selfe went to the howse of Torazemon      200
Dono, where we fownd 3 or 4 more of the kinges councell, whoe tould us
we had need to look well to our witnesses to prove the frires in
preson at Holands howse to be padres; otherwaies our processe of the
friggat would be lost, for that Gonrok Dono took their partes against
us, soe that we must have other witnesses then our selves; for
allthough all our fleet said it was soe, yet our owne witnesse would
not be taken. Also they tould us we ought to enlardg our presentes to
the Emperor and councell, having such intricate matters in hand, and
that, for a present to the yong prince (themperours sonne), we might
take councell when we weare above whether it weare fytt to doe it or
noe, according as we saw our busynes goe forward.

Also they said the king desired that the next yeare, when our shiping
came, that we would lett all stay at Cochie and non enter into
Firando. Unto which we made answer that, seeing our howsing was made
at Firando, we desired that 5 or 6 shipps might each yeare enter into
Firando. Unto which they replied that then we ought to cleare the
harbor of the wreck cast away the other yeare, otherwais, yf any other
should miscarry, it would quite spoile his harbor that noe bark nor
shiping could ever enter into it. So they left us to consider of the
matter, the Hollanders saying that their shipp was cast away by
falling fowle of the _James Royalls_ cable, and therefore that it was
reason we paid halfe.

Also they shewed a letter from Gonrok Dono, wherin he wrot the _Tono_
of Firando to stay Capt. Speck till the processe of the friggot was
ended; but the admerall Johnson nor Capt. Speck would not consent to
it.

And I receved a letter from the Molucas from Mr. Wm. Nicoles, dated in
Mallayo the 9th of August, and sent per the shipp _Sealand_.

_September 23_ (_Fatchinguach 18_).--This night our gunpouder howse,
where we dryd our pouder, was beset with men to have donne som            201
mischeefe, as we thought; but, being espied, they fled and had a boate
ready to convay them away. There was 5 of them seene neare unto the
howse, and one of our men which were at watch thrust at one of them
with a short pike, which the other caught by the iron head, and it
being badly nealed he puld it affe and carid it away with hym, and soe
fled with the rest, as afore said. Soe we esteeme they were sett on by
the Spaniardes and Portingales to have blowne up all our gunpouder, to
have overthrowne our voyadge, knowing themperour will suffer us to by
nor carry out non.

_September 24_ (_Fatchinguach 19_).--There was 465 _pico._ lead waid
out this day.

I went to Torazemon Dono, the kinges secretary, and tould hym of the
pretence of blowing up our gunpouder howse, which I and the rest
suspected was per instigation of Spaniard and Portingales; the which
he wondered at, and tould me he would make it knowne to the king.

And, after, we were enformed that Lues Martin and other 2 Portingales
departed from Firando late yisternight, after daylight donne, and went
with their boate into the cod of the bay neare to our gunpouder howse,
to have seene the sport of blowing up the howse; but, the matter being
discovered, they made hast away, and the villens set on to doe it did
escape in an other boate for Firando, som of which we hope to find
out.

This night, after midnight, the dead corps of Bongo Samma was carid to
be burned, or rather a peece of wood in place, for he was thought to
be a Christian. All the nobilletye with a multetude of other people
did follow the hearce. The cheefe mornar was a woaman, all in white,
with her haire hanging downe her back and her face covered, and a
strange attire upon her head like a rownd stoole. All the _Boses_ (or
pagon pristes) went before the herse with great lightes, and the
nobillety followed after, all in generall with such silence that noe      202
words weare spoaken; and they kneeled downe in divers places, as
though they had praid, but not one word heard what they said. And in
many places they threw abrod _cashes_ (or brasse money) in great
quantety, and in the end most of all at the place where he was burned,
that the people might take it, as they did allso much white lynen
cloth which compased in a fowre square place where the herse was
burned. And there was one _bose_, or prist, hanged hym selfe in a tree
hard by the place of funerall, to accompany hym in an other world, for
_boses_ may not cutt their bellies, but hang them selves they may. And
3 other of the dead mans servantes would have cut their bellies, to
have accompanid hym to serve hym in an other world, as they stidfastly
beleeve they might have donne; but the king would not suffer them to
doe it. Many others, his frendes, cut affe the 2 foremost joyntes of
their littell fingers and threw them into the fire to be burned with
the corps, thinking it a greate honor to them selves and the least
service they could doe to hym, soe deare a frend and greate a
personage, for he was brother to Foyne Samma, grandfather to the King
Figen a Came, that now is. And he hath adopted Gentero Samma, the
kinges brother, for his lawfull sonne, becase he had no children of
his owne, and hath left all he hath to hym, he being the kinges pledg
at Edo.

_September 25_ (_Fatchinguach 20_).--I went to Torazemon Dono, the
kinges secretary, and tould hym we had found out the theefe which
pulled affe the pike head and 2 other of his consortes, desiring hym
to speake to the king that we might have justice against them, and
that they might be constrayned to tell whoe sett them on to have
blowne up our gunpouder; the which he promised me to do. But first he
would examen our witnesses that had brought to light those 3 men,
which were the _bongew_ and neighbors of the villadge neare the           203
gunpouder howse, whoe fownd them out and made it knowne unto me and
others.

Also Semi Dono sent for our _jurebasso_ and the Holland _jurebasso_
and bid them tell us (as from the kinge) that both we and the
Hollanders should geve in our answer to morrow at nowne tuching the
geting the wrackt shipp out of the harbour, for that the king would
not suffer any of our shiping to enter till that weare taken out of
the roade.

Also, the _Bull_ riding by the _Pepercorns_ side, to helpe to carine
her, as she had donne the like to the _Bull_ before, and a planke
going from one shipp to the other, as Mr. Munden was going over, a
leawd fello of the _Pepercorns_ company hive up the plank with his
shoulder and threw hym affe betwixt the 2 shipps, which lying soe
close together, he could not falle into the sea, which yf he had, he
had byn drowned without remedy; yet he was sore brused with the falle.

_September 26_ (_Fatchinguach 21_).--We had a generall councell of
English and Duch at Hollandes howse about taxing or prising the 2
shipps _Pepercorns_ and _Muyon_, but could not agree upon prise of the
shipps hulls, mastes, and tackling, we seting the _Pepercorne_ at 300
tons, and the tonne at 5 _l._, is 1500 _l._ str.; and the Duch would
have rated the _Muyon_ at 2000 _l._ str., being a lesser shipp then
ours, they alledging she was newer. Soe that is referd to the Councell
of Defence at Jaccatra.

Also it was spoaken of to have us to joyne with the Hollanders in
purce, to help to gett the shipp that was wracked the last yeare out
of the harbour of Firando, the king comanding us so to doe. Unto which
we answered that she belonged to the Duch and was non of the shipps of
defence, and therefore we had noe reason to be at charg of money to
get her out. Yet we offerd them before, when we had leasure, since the
arivall of the fleete, to lett 2 or 300 of our men helpe them to get
her out; but then they made light of it. Yet, notwithstanding, to geve
the King of Firando content, I said that, yf the Duch would agree         204
with the Japons to rydd the havon of her, I was content to sett my
hand to a writing to be contributary to som part of the charge, with
condition it should be left to the precedentes at Jaccatra to determen
whether it was fitt we should pay any thing or noe; and, in the meane
tyme, the Duch to disburse all the charges.

We are geven to understand that Ric. Short and other Englishmen are
run away to the enemy at Nangasaque.

_September 29_ (_Fatchinguach 24_).--I wrote 2 letters to Nangasaque,
one to Yasimon Dono, Gonrok Donos clark, and the other to Andrea
Dittis, China Capt., to use their best endevour to seek out for Ric.
Short and the rest of the English runawaies, espetially Short that is
a witnesse against the frires in the Duch howse and hath seene one of
them say mas at Nangasaque, and was enticed 4 or 5 daies past per
Francisco Lopas and 2 Portingall frires to run away. The King of
Firando sent a man of his with letters to Gonrok Dono to same effect.

_September 30_ (_Fatchinguach 25_).--We went to Holland howse to
supper, all us, to Capt. Speckes foy[102] or farewell, where we were
kindly entertayned.

And I sealed up my letters for Jaccatra and England:--

  to Jaccatra per ship _Swan_ and per Capt. Speck.
    1 to Mr. Ric. Furland, precedent.
    1 to Mr. Tho. Brakedon.
    1 to Mr. James Wrine, prechar.
    2 journalles and ballances, C. and D.
    a book presentes.
    a book purcers acco. last yeare.
    2 inventories prx. goodes, fleet and _Pepercorne_.
    a protest against admerall Wm. Johnson.
    2 recept of shipper of _Swan_, for thing sent in the _Swan_.
    1 letter of myne from Mr. Wm. Nicolles, agent.
  to London, per ship _Swan_ and per Capt. Speck.                         205
    1 to Sr. Tho. Smith, governor.
    1 to governor and committis.
    1 to Sr. Tho. Willson, knight.
    1 to Mrs. Mary Adames.
    1 to Capt. Jno. Saris.
    1 to my brother, Walter Cocks.
    1 to Capt. Pring.
    1 to Mr. Harry Smith.

     [102] Foy: a merry-making generally given at parting, or on
     entering into some situation.--Halliwell, _Arch. Dict._

_October 1_ (_Fatchinguach 26_).--Alvaro Munos came to Firando and
tells me Ric. Short was staied at Nangasaque, at his first arivall,
for a padre, but after released, when they knew whoe he was.

Capt. Lafevre was beaten and drubed per the rascall Japon laborers of
Firando, because he landed at kinges steares; but, as it is said, the
king hath taken the doers thereof and will put som of them to death;
but I doe not beleeve it.

_October 2_ (_Fatchinguach 27_).--I paid xxiiij _tais_ plate barrs to
Jno. Portus for a gould hat band sett with redd Peru stones.

I wrot iij letters to Nangasaque about our run awayes, these
Englishmen following: Ric. Short, master mate in the _Moone_, Harris,
botswane of the _Pepercorne_, with ij others of said ships company,
and Alexander Hix, Luke Anderwicke, and Wm. Harris, of the _Bulls_
company.

And the shipp _Bull_ was set on fire per a lampe in the steward roome,
but quenched in good tyme.

_October 3_ (_Fatchinguach 28_).--A bark of Japons, being sent after
the runawais with speed, overtook them and kept them from proceading
forward, till Mr. Sayer came after. Soe they brought back vj men
runawais, viz:--

  of _Pepercornes_ men.
    Edward Harris
    Thomas Gilbert
    Christopher Butbee
  of the _Bulles_ men.
    Alexander Hix
    Luke Underwick
    Wm. Harris

And the master of the bark which carid them away is taken presoner,       206
with an other Japon of Nangasaque that entised them to run away; and
the King of Firando will put them both to death, as it is reported.

And I deliverd my letters to Capt. Speck this day to carry for
Jaccatra and England.

_October 4_ (_Fatchinguach 29_).--I wrot 2 letters by the shipp
_Swan_, viz.:--

  sent per Philipe Garland.
    1 to the precedent Mr. Fursland at Jaccatra.
    1 to the Governor and Company in England.

I went and took my leave of Capt. Speck and the rest of Duch
merchantes which goe in the _Swan_; and carid Capt. Speck a gallon
bottell annis water, and to Sr. Matias and Albartus each one a bottell
of a pottell, geving the glasse bottelles and all.

_October 5_ (_Conguach 1_).--The _tono_ sent to have us and the
Hollanders geve hym a writing of our handes, each aparte, how many
_pico_ lead was waid out for the Emperour, and that Gonrok ordayned we
should pay for the iron wedges and smiths labour for cutting the lead.
Unto which we answerd, his _bongews_ had the just acco. of the _pico._
waid out; and for the iron wedges (as we formerly promised) we were
content to pay, they being left to us when the work was finished; but
for the laborers which wroght, Gonrok was to pay them.

_October 6_ (_Conguach 2_).--The shipp _Swan_ put to sea this day in
the after nowne, and I went abord with the rest of the merchantes to
bidd hym farewell; and, as it seemed, the admerall Johnson did geve
hym a churlish farewell, according to his borishe condition.

_October 7_ (_Conguach 3_).--I delivered or gave a recept to King of
Firando for 2780 _pico._ lead waid out for themperour of Japon, and
receved, per order from Gonrok Dono, in full payment of 2780 _pico._      207
lead, 7510 _tais_, and 5000 _tas._ was receved the 17th ultimo, is all
12510 _tais_, at 4-1/2 _tais pico._, sould to Shongo Samma, Emperour
of Japon.

_October 8_ (_Conguach 4_).--This day weare arayned vj English
runawais, most of them being duble runawais and som fellons, and
therefore, by generall consent, according to marshall law, condemned
all to be hanged, 3 of them being of the _Bulles_ men and the other 3
of the _Pepercorns_ men, as doth apere the 3th day of this mo. of
October, when they weare retorned. And one James Martyn, accused by
som to be the author of this mischeefe, he being a Scotsman, and fownd
to be a cheefe bellows blower or sterrer up of all mutanies
heretofore. Soe the admerall, Robt. Adames, sent a comition out to
aprehend hym and bring hym ashore and soe put hym in preson to answer
for hym selfe.

_October 9_ (_Conguach 5_).--Yistarnight I was enformed that Francisco
Lopas and a semenary prist were com to towne, and lodged in the howse
of the capt. of the friggot taken the last yeare; of which I advised
Torezemon Dono to tell the king thereof by Coa Jno., our _jurebasso_,
it being late, and to geve order noe strangers should passe out. And
this morning I sent the same _jurebasso_ to Torezemon Dono secretary,
to know the kinges answere; which was, I might speake of these matters
when Gonrok Dono came. Unto which I sent answer, it might be that then
these pristes would be gon, and then it was to late to speake. Yet,
for all this, there was noe eare nor respect geven to my speeches.

The admerall Capt. Adames, with all the comanders and merchants,
saving my selfe and Mr. Osterwick, went to Cochie to see the execution
of the condemd men. And 4 of them were executed, viz. Edward Harris,
boteswaine.[103]

     [103] The names of the others are not given.

_October 10_ (_Conguach 6_).--Alvaro Munois went away this day            208
without satisfying me for my serne of mase. This villen did lye heare
to entice our men to run away; but now per the _tono_ is comanded out
of towne.

_October 12_ (_Conguach 8_).--Taccamon Dono sent for me, he being
accompanid with Torazemon Dono, and Mr. Osterwick with me. They
enquered of me about the padres I said were in the capt. of the
friggates lodging, and sent for his host to know whether any such
people were in the howse; which he denied. Yet asked me whether I did
know them for padres, yf I did see them. Unto whome I answered that,
yf he brought them out, I had wittnesses which knew them well.

_October 13_ (_Conguach 9_).--Yasimon Dono, Gonrok Donos clark, being
ready to goe up to Miaco and soe for Edo with the lead for themperour,
I went and vizeted hym, and carid hym a pottell of strong annis water
distilled with musk, which he took in good parte, and lefte the
company where he was and came into an other roome with me; which som
others took in dogen and used som wordes about it. But this was a
fello, a spie sent per the fathers to pick quarrells against us. Yet I
said littell to it, but gave place, the others saying they staid for
Yasimon.

And this day, in the after nowne, the admerall Johnson, with Capt.
Speck and Capt. Lafevere, came to our howse to know whether our shipp
_Pepercorne_ were ready to goe out or noe, as theirs was; for that
tyme passed and our enemies were ready to gett tyme upon us, and that
their shipp, the _Muyon_, was ready according to composition. Unto
which our comander, Robt. Addams, with the rest of us, answerd that
our shipp was as ready as theirs, and that on Twesday next should be
ready to set seale.

_October 14_ (_Conguach 10_).--I advized Mr. Sayer, at Nangasaque, to
look out for Short, costa que costa, and to speake to [contractors] to
send all away per first, for that our fleet would all be ready to
departe within 20 daies after date hereof, and that the _Pepercorne_      209
and _Muyon_ were now ready to departe; as also to send noe more barly
at above 8 _gantas_ per _mas_.

_October 16_ (_Conguach 12_).--Mr. Sayer wrot me that, a friggat going
out, they serched her to the verry keele and opened all chistes, to
have fownd Ric. Short, but could not be fownd. [They fownd] above 1000
pikes, _langenott_, and _cattans_, and brought them back, and would
have staid the pilot; but the capt. more standes bound to answer for
all which is taken.

_October 17_ (_Conguach 13_).--I wrot out 2 remembrances for Mr.
Christopher Bogens and Mr. Mathew Moreton, Cape merchant and master of
the shipp _Pepercorne_, she being ready to proceed on a voyage to
Manillias, she and the shipp _Moyon_ in her company, they going before
the rest of the fleete; the coppie of which remembrances I keepe by
me.

Gonrok Dono wrot to the King of Firando in the behalf of the
Portingall capt. moore, to have the ould Portingall which I kept in
howse sent to hym; of which the king sent me word with the letter of
Gonrok. Unto which I answered, I did keepe that Portugez per his
Highnesse leave and lycense formerly geven me, and soe desired to doe
till Ric. Short with our other English runawaies were retorned. Unto
which it seemed the king was content, for I heard nothing afterward.

_October 18_ (_Conguach 14_).--The 2 shipps, _Pepercorne_ and _Moyen_,
put to sea this day in the after nowne; and went abord both of them at
Cochie, and [carid] Mr. Moreton, Mr. Bogens, and the capt. and Cape
merchant of the _Moyen_, Mr Houlden and           ,[104] each of them
a bottell of annis water, and 2 bottelles to Hary Dodsworth and
Abraham Smart.

Mr. Thomas Harod departed out of this worlde this day, towardes night,    210
after he had made his will.

     [104] Blank in MS.

_October 19_ (_Conguach 15_).--Mr. Harod was buryed this day, and left
per his will his wages in England due per Company, with his howses at
Blackwall, to his doughter, and to his wife 2 groates or 8 pence
starling, for that she should cleame noe parte of his goods in respect
she marryed in his abcense. Also he gave to me a gerdell and hangers
of velvet with silver buckelles and hooks, and also x _taies_ bar
plate to make me a ring; and j C. rialles of 8 betwixt Mr. Edmond
Sayer and his yong doughter Joan, to part eaven, with his great chist
and bible to Mr. Ed. Sayer ditto.

_October 20_ (_Conguach 16_).--The King of Firando went on hunting
yistarday, accompanied with above 3000 men, into the mountayns, and
this day retorned with 7 or 8 fallo deare and as many wild boares or
pigges. And the king sent me a fallo deare, skyn, guttes and all, and
Semidone a wild swine or pigg.

_October 21_ (_Conguach 17_).--Capt. Leonard Camps and my selfe went
to the king to geve him to understand that tyme passed away and Gonrok
Dono came not, soe that it was expedient we departed forthwith to the
Emperours court to doe our dutie and carry our presentes, for that now
winter came on and, yf we went not presently, it was to late to goe
this yeare; soe that we were better to loose the friggatt and all the
goodes in her than encur the Emperours displeasure; yet, if his
Highnesse would, we cout at this instant produce witnesses suffitient
to prove the 2 men, in the Hollanders howse presoners, to be frires or
padres. But the king answered he could do nothing without Gonrok; soe
that this night he would send to hym per expres, to see whether he
would com or noe, and soe, upon his answere, we might departe.

Also Capt. Camps desired to have justis executed against them which       211
did beate Capt. Lafevre. Unto which the king replied, what justis he
would have, for the doars thereof weare yet in preson. Capt. Camps
replied that he did not desire their lives, nether, yf it had byn
offered against hym selfe, would he speake any more about it, only in
respect of the abusse offerd against such a man as Comander Lafevre
was, he desired the same parties which offerd the abuse might be
brought to the place where they did it and be beaten with cudgells. At
which the king smiled and said it could not be, but, yf he would have
them cutt in peeces, he would doe it. But Capt. Camps said he desired
not their lives, yet that he would certifie Admerall Johnson and Capt.
Lafevre what he said.

_October 22_ (_Conguach 18_).--I rec. of Mr. Arthur Hatch, precher,
geven for the making of the buriall place 12 _ta._ 6 _m._; more, 1 bar
plate of Mr. Chapman, 2 _ta._

Cuschcron Dono and Jenqueze Dono came to me and tould me the
Hollanders had lent iij M. _tais_ to the _tono_ (or king) of this
place, and that he expected the like from us. Unto whome I answerd
that they know the booty which the Hollanders had brought into this
place, which we had noe parte of, and therefore might doe that which
we could not doe, having hitherto spent and geven away treble more
then we have gott; yet I would take councell with the rest of the
merchantes and se what might be donne and then geve them answer, for
it was against reason for us to take up money at intrest and lend to
others for nothing, and, besides, many other noble men sent to borow
money, we having non to lend, as they themselves did know as well as
we. Unto which they answerd, it was true, yet, notwithstanding, it was
fyt to lend to the king, he now standing in need, although we lent non
to the rest; for soe it behoved us, being strangers, yf we esteemed
our owne good.

And we sould all our small deare skins at 13 _tais_ per cento, of them
which came in the _Pepercorne_.

_October 23_ (_Conguach 19_).--I receved a quittance from Capt. Robt.     212
Adams, admerall, for 1814 R. of 8, at 5_s._ str. per R. of 8, for the
xvjth parte of priz goodes, to be geven in the fleete, for which Capt.
Adames is bound to make it good, yf the Honble. Company think it not
fyt to pay it. And soe the capt. of other shipps gave quittances to
Capt. Adams in like sort, to be answerable for that they rec. for
their shipps proporsion; and each comander took the like securety from
their shipps companies, that their wages should be answerable for it,
yf it were not alowed per the Honble. Company in England. Yet som
refuced to receve any money upon that termes, but the most parte did
accept of it. God grant those scabbed sheepe doe not in the end spoile
the whole flock.

_October 24_ (_Conguach 20_).--This day is the feast of hors-runing
with archars on horseback to shoute at a mark with bowes and arowes,
the horse runing his full carer.

Mr. Sayer retorned from Nangasaque within night, and brought news that
the _Pepercorne_ and _Moyen_ have taken a Portingall junck which went
out of Nangasaque and bound for Amacou.

_October 25_ (_Conguach 21_).--We and the Hollanders paid 900 _tais_
plate barrs to the King of Firando for the 200 _pico._ lead geven hym
in his present the last yeare.

_October 26_ (_Conguach 22_).--The _bongews_ at Cochie did lay handes
upon our English men and (as the admerall, Capt. Adames, doth tell me)
have taken above 20, and sent hym word it was per order from the king.

_October 27_ (_Conguach 23_).--Mr. Cockram envited all the princepall,
both of English and Duch, abord the _Elizabeth_, to dyner this day,
where we had good entertaynment and good cheare with healthes of guns
shott affe in good sort.

This night was very stormy wether, like to a tuffon, in which the
_Palsgrove_ broke a cable, and the _Elizabeth_ a cable and a hawser.

We complayned to the justis how our men were taken presoners per the      213
Japons without reason, they fordging debtes upon them which they owd
not, striping our men naked and taking from them all they had, when
they owed them nothing. Unto which, answer was made the king knew
nothing thereof.

_October 28_ (_Conguach 24_).--Capt. Camps and myselfe went to
Torazemon Dono to desire hym to speake to the king that we might go to
themperour with our presentes; and that we might deliver our presentes
to the king before we went up, because the shipps weare now ready to
departe. Also we made knowne unto hym the takeing and keeping our men
presoners, both English and Duch. Unto all which he answered, that the
king desired us to stay till the last of this moone _Conguach_, for
that the 29th day (which is 5 daies hence) he expected Gonrok Dono to
come to Firando, for soe had he promised hym without fayle to doe. And
for the present to be deliverd unto hym before we deliverd our present
to themperour, it was not fitt, and therefore best to lett it rest
till we retorned from the Court. And for our men taken presoners, the
kinge knew nothing thereof, but now he would make it knowne unto hym
and retorne us his answer.

_October 30_ (_Conguach 26_).--I was enformed this day per Capt.
Lennis, Mr. Barrns being the man which tould it, that Mr. Arnold
Brown, master of the shipp _Palsgrove_, hath stolne 5 fardelles of
silke of priz goodes and stowed them under his cabben, whereof Mr.
Trumpeter of _Palsgrove_ is witnesse; of the which I enformed Mr.
Eaton, Mr. Cockram, Mr. Sayer, and Mr. Ostarwick, and all together
made it knowne to the admerall, Capt. Robt. Adames, and Mr. Jno.
Munden. Soe it was agreed to serch his cabben to morow; but Mr. Arthur
Hatch, preacher in the same shipp (whose cabben is next to Mr.
Brownes) tould us that out of dowbt we should now find nothing theare,
it being formerly removed before shipp was upon a carin, yet that         214
he did see 4 or 5 bales brought in by others at sea and stowed theare.
Soe hereupon we staid the serch.

_October 31_ (_Conguach 27_).--We went abord the shipp _Palsgrove_ to
dyner, where all the Duch were envited likwaies.

And Capt. Camps came to thenglish house, where we agreed to sett
forward towardes themperours Court on Munday mornyng, yf the king of
this place did not stay us perforce, which a long time he hath
perswaded us unto.

_November 1_ (_Conguach 28_).--We dyned this day at China Capt., where
we had good entertaynment, both sea men and merchantes, with the
dansing beares.

And towardes night we had news that 3 of our howses at Cochie were
burned, being sett on fire by a retchlesse fello that did seeth the
kettell to neare the howse walle. All the howsing was quite burned to
the grownd, with som 9 barilles of tunny fish and 9 or 10 muskittes
and 20 swordes; but our seales and other matters of worth were saved
by the industry of our men with the helpe of the Hollanders and som
Japons. Yt is said most parte of the fish which was thought to be
burned was stole away per Japons, as also som 6 muskettes and som
swordes.

_November 2_ (_Conguach 29_).--I went to Cochie to see what hurt the
fire had donne, and fownd it as I before discribed, only many of our
truck plankes, with bordes and other tymbers, were much burned or
scubered, but quenched in good tyme.

And the king sent to me to know my answer whether I would pay the
debtes our marrenars owed, that were per the Japons taken presoners.
Unto which I answerd, no, for that they had trusted them contrary to
his Highnesse proclemation to trust non but such as broght money; and
besides they taxed our men to owe them 10 tymes more then was due unto
them, beating them and striking them naked, and per force taking all      215
the money from other men which owed them nothing; of the which I ment
to demand justis from his Highnesse, and that our men might be sett
free, for that the Emperour would suffer us to carry noe Japons in our
shiping, and therefore no reason to keepe our men per force, which
they might do yf they pleased, but I would never consent to pay a peny
of that the Japons demanded. Unto which they answerd that the king
would not keepe our men.

_November 3_ (_Conguach 30_).--I sent the _caboques_ 4 _tais_ small
plate for _fannos_ at China Capt. howse.

I wrot a peticion this day to the king, making knowne the taking our
men presoners with other abuses offerd to our nation, requiring our
men to be sett at libertie.

_November 5_ (_Junguach 2_).--Gonrok Dono and Feze Dono arived at
Firando this day; and Gonrok Dono sent me a present of 2 silk
_kerremons_, and Feze Dono sent me 500 egges, 30 hense, and 25 drid
netes tonges.

_November 6_ (_Junguach 3_).--I paid in small plate as followeth,
viz.:--

To the glover or shewmaker, Jenchero Dono, for--

                                                 _ta.  m.  co._
  5 peare pumps at 2 _mas_ pear                    1   0    0
  2 peare gloves, at 3 _mas_ peare                 0   6    0
  3 peare garters and 4 roses, making              0   5    0

More, paid the gouldsmith--

  For making a silver cover for mack jack[105]     0   2    0
  For making furneture of a gerdell, silver        0   7    0
  For making a head of silver or cap for staffe    0   1    0

More, paid to cooper for Susanna, viz.--

  For 2 tubbs to wash bodies in                    0   3    0
  For 4 bucketts to cary water                     0   3    0
  For a tub to put rise in                         0   1    0
  For 4 small buckettes or tubbs                   0   1    0

And we and the Hollanders were called before the king, where we found     216
Gonrok Dono, Feze Dono, and others, which caused the 2 padres,
presoners in the Hollands howse, to be brought before them, with the
capt. of the friggatt and others, where all our papers were perused,
and amongst the rest a letter or ordinance from the Bushopp of
Manillia, authoresing frire Pedro de Sunega to be prior and vicker
generall over all Christians in all provinces of Japon, with other
letters to conferme it. Yet this frire did utterly deny it, and that
he was a merchant and noe frire. Soe then we produced 2 witnesses, the
one a Portugez, called Ravelles, and the other an inhabitant of the
Manillias; both which confessed they knew frire Pedro de Sunega to be
a padre of the order of St. Augustin, and Ravelles said he had seene
hym say mas in the howse of Alvaro Munios at Nangasaque, and that
Harnando Ximenes did see the like. Soe for this tyme the king and
Gonrok Dono did dismis us, and gave noe sentence, but willed us to
produce more witnesses. Unto which we answerd we could produce noe
more, and willed them to make an end of it, as God should put it into
their mind, to thentent we might procead on our voyage to vizet the
Emperour. But they replied they would call us to morow or next day and
make an end yf they could.

     [105] Perhaps a jack, or large flagon, of _makiye_ or lacquer.

_November 7_ (_Junguach 4_).--We and the Hollanders went to the
pallace, being called per the king to dispute our matter about the
frigatt; where we found Gonrok Dono, Feze Dono, and the rest, of
Nangasaque, and shewed other writeinges to prove this Pedro de Suniga
to be a father and prior and vicar generall of all the Cbristians in
Japon. And the king sent for Harnando Ximenes and Lues the telor to
reade over the letters in Spanish, but nether the one nor other would
doe it. And soe late we retorned; it being ordayned to make an end to
morow. But the king, with Semi Dono and others, sent us word secretly
to stand to that which we had spoaken, and then we needed not to          217
feare to get our processe, for that 7 of ten had allready geven their
voices on our sides.

_November 8_ (_Junguach 5_).--We and the Duch made our selves ready to
have gon to the pallace, to have made an end of our processe of the
frigat; but after nowne word was sent us to stay till to morow, for
that Feze Dono was sick. But the matter was, for that they were
envited to the China Capt., Andrea Dittis, to dyner. And the China
Capt. tould me that the King of Firando sent for hym in secret, and
asked hym whether he knew this Pedro de Sunega to be a padre or no.
Unto which he answered he knew hym to be a padre, as his sonne
Augustin did the like, being at Manillas; yet, in respect he lived at
Nangasaque, and that Gonrok Dono was his frend, he did not desire to
be seene in the matter. And towardes night Torazemon Dono went to
Hollands howse and sent for me thether, and tould us that of 10 which
were of the councell proving them fathars, 7 weare on our side, and
the rest could stand upon nothing but to ask us what was the occation
that these two denied themselves to be fathers, all the rest
confessing them to be such at first demand; to the which we should
take councell how to answer, when we were to com before the king and
Gonrok Dono. Also, at same tyme, the 3 Japon _jurebassos_, which came
with Gonrok Dono from Nangasaque, came to Hollands howse to demand
lycense to have private conferrence with the 2 fryres, presoners; but
the king sent us secret adviz not to consent unto it. Soe answer was
made unto them that they should not com to speech of them except it
were in presence of the king and Gonrok Dono and the rest of the
justices.

_November 9_ (_Junguach 6_).--The king with Gonrok Dono went a fishing
this day; soe we had noe audience about our plito. Yet the king sent
us word to stand to that we formerly proposed, and to answer to certen
demandes as he gave us the forme how to doe, and not to think any         218
ill, yf he were sharpe in speeches against us, which he would doe of
purpose to blind our enemis.

_November 10_ (_Junguach 7_).--I paid in plate of barrs to Jno. Japon:
for Susannas slave Ita, 12: 0: 0; for a sett of _gocas_ for her,
6: 5: 0.

The China Capt. gave me a silver tastar and a silver dish to sett it
upon, poiz both 4 _ta._ 4 _ma._[106]

The shipp _Palsgrove_ went out this day to Cochie roade.

I staid all this day attending to goe to Court about our plito; but,
as I am enformed, Gonrok desireth the king we should stay till som men
com from Nangasaque, which he hath sent for. And, as it is said, this
Gonrok Dono did report in themperours Court that we and the Hollanders
did of mallice accuse these Spaniardes to be fathers, which he knewe
were non such, and that upon payne of his life he would prove it to be
soe. But now, finding our testemony to be such as it is and canot be
denied, he knoweth not what to doe, but useth all _trampas_[107] and
fetches he can to delay tyme and bring it to nothing per all meanes he
may.

     [106] In the margin called a "silver cupp and sawser".

     [107] Span., traps, tricks.

_November 11_ (_Junguach 8_).--Gonrok Dono and others sent both us and
the Hollanders word that they would send to call 10 padres or frires
which were presoners at Umbra, and that we should make choise of any 3
or 4 of them to be wittnesses whether the 2 prisoners at Hollandes
howse were fathers or no. But we retorned answer that we knew not
whether those 10 men they spake of were fathers or noe; nether would
we have to doe with them nor put the matter to their discretion, which
we had soe manifestly proved allready.

_November 12_ (_Junguach 9_).--I went to Torazemon Dono to tell hym
againe of the abuses daylie offered to our English marrenars, at          219
Cochie espetially, desiring to have redresse; and that I would send
one of our _jurebassos_ to the admerall, Capt. Adames, at Cochie, to
look out in all howses where our men were thus abused and to take true
notis hereof, as his Highnesse (the king) had ordayned. The which he
answered me was well donne, and that this day he would put the king
againe in mind therof and tell hym what I said. But sowne after he
sent his man unto me to tell me the king would take order that our men
should all be set at libertie, whether they owed money or noe.

_November 13_ (_Junguach 10_).--The Duch shipp _Trowe_ went to Cochie
road, and I sent 4 barkes to helpe to toe her out.

And I parted the _coshon_ money of Tozemon Dono, being 96 _tais_ 5
_mas_, amongst our servantes as followeth, viz.:--

                                  _ta.  m.  co._
  To ould Jno. _jurebasso_         20   0    0
  To greate Tome _jurebasso_       20   0    0
  To Coa Jno. _jurebasso_          20   0    0
  To Migell, Corean _jurebasso_    05   0    0
  To Coa Domingo                   10   0    0
  To Lawrance                      06   0    0
  To Paule                         05   5    0
  To littell Tome _jurebasso_      05   0    0
  To ould Domingo                  05   0    0

_November 14_ (_Junguach 11_).--Capt. Camps and my selfe having made a
writing in the Japon languadg, per councell of the king of this place,
directed to Gonrok Dono and the king, wherin we advized that, our
proves against the padres being made, we would say noe more in that
matter, but left it to their discresions to doe therein what they
pleased, we attesting we took them as our enemies, and did not know
they weare padres till they confessed it themselves; nether would we
have to doe with any padres they brought from Umbra or Nangasaque         220
to be judges in our affares tuching that matter, nor would not beleeve
nether them nor any other Spaniardes nor Portingales they should
produce in that matter, houlding them parsiall and our enemies in that
matter. Soe we desired leave to departe towardes themperours Court to
doe our duties; and sent this writing per our 2 _jurebassos_ to Gonrok
Dono. And he caused them to cary it to the King of Firando,
accompanied with one of his owne men.

And the ambassadors of the King of Syam, which are now retorned from
themperours Court, where they were royally receved, did com to vizet
our English howse, accompanied with Capt. Yasimon Dono of Nangasaque
and a man which themperour sent with them from Edo to accompany them
to Nangasaque. The ambassador gave me a barrill of wyne for a present,
and the Japon which accompanid hym from Edo an other. And the
ambassador requested me to geve hym a letter of favour with an English
flagg, yf in case they met with any English or Hollandes shipps at
sea; and Capt. Yasimon Dono did desire the like: which I promised to
them both to performe. And I sent a pottell glasse bottell of annise
water for a present to the ambassador, which he took in very good
part.

_November 15_ (_Junguach 12_).--We were sent for to the Court to make
an end of our processe with the padres, where we found 4 padres of the
presoners of Umbra, one being a Japon, as also Lues Martin, Balthazar
Martin, Alvaro Munios, Pinta a woaman, with divers others, brought in
by Gonrok Dono to doe what in them la to witnesse against us; where
many speeches passed, but non would confesse they knew them to be
padres, but our two witnesses stood still to their word, although
foule mouthed Munios did revile them. And so we were remitted till to
morow. Yet I was secretly advized it would goe on our side, and that
the capt. of the friggat was to suffer death with others; but Yochian     221
Dies, the capt., desired that I or Capt. Camps might suffer death with
hym, according to the use of Japon, that he which causeth an other man
to die must goe the same way hym selfe.

_November 16_ (_Junguach 13_).--I sent Domingo _jurebasso_, with the
boteswaine and pursers mate of the shipp _Moone_, to look out in every
Japons howse at Cochie where they kept our Englishmen presoners, where
they fownd som with boultes and shakelles, others with cheanes, others
bownd and pineoned with ropes, som owing nothing to the Japons, and
others tormented because they would not confesse they owed 4 or 5
times more to Japons then was due to them. All which I put up in a
writing and delivered it to the King of Firandos councell to have
redresse.

And Oyen Dono came and tould me that we were sure to get our processe
of the friggat; and Cushcron Dono tould me the like, and that he
thought divers others weare like to suffer death about it.

_November 17_ (_Junguach 14_).--Within night the Hollanders and we
were sent for to the Court about our plito with the padres (or frires)
which also were sent for. And we remeaned theare till 11 or 12 a
clock, and came not to sight of the king, and then had leave to
departe; only in that tyme they sent for 2 letters directed to frier
padre Tomas, a Japon padre, presoner at Umbra, and now brought to
Firando, as I noted heretofore. And, as we are secretly enformed, this
frire hath confessed that the 2 presoners at Hollands howse are
padres, for he was all day in company with the king and Gonrok Dono in
secret conference, and, as it is said, will turne gentell againe, or
at least renege his pristhood, to save his life. And, as som say,
Gonrok Dono is suspected to be a Christian.

_November 18_ (_Junguach 15_).--The shipp _Elizabeth_ went out of
Firando to Cochie.

And the King of Firando sent for the Hollanders and us to make an end     222
of the plito of the padres; where we fownd above xx Japon Christians
renegados, whome Gonrok Dono had brought from Nangasaque to see yf
they knew whether these two fathers were padres or no. Among whome was
a blind man, bad to see another, yet by his voice he tould the King of
Firando that he knew hym to be fraire Pedoro de Sunega; yet, as I
understood, the King of Firando will not admit hym for a witnesse,
because he is of Firando; but I know not whether he doe it as a frend,
knowing we have other witnesses enow, or else to bring us to other
trialles. Once the end will try all. And in the end the king hym selfe
came out and asked Capt. Camps and me whether we had other matter to
say or no against the fathers. Unto whome we answerd noe, desiring to
have lycense to departe towardes themperours Court, for that tyme
passed. Unto which the king made answer that he would permitt us to
departe when he pleased.

_November 19_ (_Junguach 16_).--We are enformed that Gonrok Dono would
have had the King of Firando joyne with hym to refer the plito about
the friggatt before themperours councell at Edo, but the king tould
hym he would now end it heare, we having soe manifest testemony as we
have on our side to prove the 2 presoners padres.

_November 20_ (_Junguach 17_).--I receved ij C. _tais_ plate barrs of
Tozamon Dono, our host of Osackay, in parte of payment of 256 _tais_
due for 128 peces Canton damasks of the deceased Capt. Wm. Adames.

And the king sent 4 ruch sleeping _kerremons_ of silke in present to
thadmerall, Capt. Adams, to be disposed of as I should adviz hym. They
were worth j C. _tais_ barr plate.

And the king and Gonrok Dono sent for me and the Hollandes capt. to
bring Gonsalo Ravello, our witnesse against Alvaro Munois; which we
did, and he stood still to his first speeches how he saw frire Pedro
de Sunega say mas in his howse; yet the frire denied it. And I think
Munois was hanged by the purse and soe cleared. And the capt. of the      223
friggot, Yochin Dies, with 29 others, are bound and put into preson,
we geting our plito of frigot.

_November 21_ (_Junguach 18_).--The Duch admerall, Wm. Johnson, and
Capt. Adames, our admerall, retorned to Firando; and we, with Capt.
Camps, Capt. Lafevre, and others, went to vizet the king and carid hym
a present of 2 _barricas_ Spanish sack, j _barrica_ of tent, and 2
jarrs of sweet meate, and gave hym thankes for the presentes of
_kerremons_; and soe took leave for the fleet to goe out to morow.

And Capt. Adames left the 4 sleeping silk coates with me till his
retorne from Manillias.

_November 22_ (_Junguach 19_).--Our fleet of 8 shipps, English and
Duch, went to sea this morning on their second voyage for Manillias.
God send them good speed. Viz.:--

  English shipps.
    The _Moone_
    The _Palsgrove_
    The _Elizabeth_
    The _Bull_
  Duch shipps.
    The _Bantam_
    The _Trow_
    The _Harlam_
    The _Hope_

_November 23_ (_Junguach 20_).--This morning the fleet put to sea,
but, as I am enformed from Capt. Adams, thadmerall, want 12 of our
men, and Mr. Cockram writes me want 17, all kept presoners per Japons
ashore, contrary to the kinges comand; and yet Capt. Adames sent a
boate of porpose ashore with 150 R. of 8 to have redeemed them, but
they asked above 200 R. of 8 more. Soe Capt. Adams wrot me that yf
they were retorned after his departure, to put them all out of wagis,
as villans and traitors to their prince and cuntrey, and soe to send
them in cheanes for Jaccatra, in the Duch shipp _New Zeland_, when she
goeth.

Ther is 4 Hollanders alsoe kept presoners ashore. And the _bongews_
took 5 _cattans_ from Mr. Sayer, 1 from Capt. Adams, and 1 from Capt.
Cleavengar, and 1 from Mr. Mourton. Mr. Sayer hath had his above          224
5 yeares, and Capt. Adames brought his out of England, and Mr. Morton
bought his in Sumatra at Janbee.

_November 24_ (_Junguach 21_).--Mr. Eaton retorned from our fleete,
shipps departed, and brought me divers letters from Capt. Adames, Mr.
Cockram, Capt. Lennis, and others, wherin they wrot me of the
detayning of our men on shore, as I noted before. Of the which I went
and conferred with Capt. Camps; and he is of opinion with us not to
pay any thinge, seeing they have detayned our men till shipps be gon.
Alsoe he was very ernest with me to stay 7 or 8 dayes to dispach
busynes for his two shipps which are heare, and, as I am enformed,
hath envited the king to dynner 6 daies hence, yet tould me nothing
thereof, for that he would get the start of us to envite the king,
leveing us noe tyme to doe the like, or else stay us longer to doe his
busynes.

_November 25_ (_Junguach 22_).--I went to Torazemon Dono and Semi Dono
to thank them for their paines taken about our busynes, telling them
that it was now tyme to goe to themperours Court, our shipps being
gone. And they tould me I had reason, as alsoe the Hollanders, soe to
doe, for that Cacazemon Dono, secretary to Oyen Dono, themperours
cheefe councellar, had wrot the King of Firando a letter that the
Spaniardes and Portingales had ended their busynes and we and the
Hollanders had noe care to com to prevent them in their proceadinges,
which he marveled at.

_November 26_ (_Junguach 23_).--I went to Hollandes howse to confer
about our going up to Court; and Capt. Camps tould me that to morow
the king came to dyner, sending hym word he would have my company
theare or else he would not come, and soe after to morow we might
departe towardes Edo. And in the meane tyme the kyng sent Stroyemon
Dono before us to the Court, to be theare before Gonrok Dono, whoe
departed from hence 2 daies past secretly to goe to Edo.

Also our presoners at Cochie wrot a letter how they are almost            225
famished; yet too good a diet for such villens. And Francis Irland
wrot me aparte that he is in for an other mans debt.

And Capt. Camps came to our howse to talke about our busynes; and we,
having made ready som xj peces ordinance to have shott off at Gonroks
departure, gave them hym for a farewell; and the Duch answered with 6.

_November 27_ (_Junguach 24_).--The king dyned at Duch howse with all
his nobilletie, I being sent for and sett second at table on his right
hand, whether I would or noe; where we had great cheare with musick,
after our cuntrey fation, singing and dansing, with ordinance shott
affe at every tyme the king drunk, 7 per the Duch, and answered with 5
per thenglish; and, when the king went away, xj peces from the Duch
and as many from thenglish for a farewell, and 5 peces for Semi Dono
as he passed per water per English howse.

_November 28_ (_Junguach 25_). We went to the king, the Hollanders and
us, to take our leave to goe to themperours Court; and he told us the
sowner the better; also that he had sent Stroyemon Dono, his _bongew_,
before, to be theare before Gonrok Dono, to prevent falce reportes
till we came.

And the _bongew_ of Cochie came to our howse, and said yf we would not
pay the money for the men presoners, that they would cary them to
Crates, Chicongo,[108] Nangasaque, and sell them, or make their best
endevours to recover the money they owed Japons. Unto whome I answerd,
to take heed what he did, as he would answer it with his life before
the Emperour of Japon, whoe had geven order we should cary noe Japons
out of his cuntrey in our shiping, and, therefore, noe reason they
should detayne our Englishmen and father falce debtes upon them when
they owed nothing.

     [108] Shikoku.

_November 29_ (_Junguach 26_).--I delivered plate for the table, of my    226
owne, to Pale, as followeth, viz.:--

    2 silver salts, one silver and guilt, with covers.
    2 silver cups, one guilt all over, other white.
    1 taster and sawser of silver and guilt.
    1 taster of silver, white.
    white:
      6 silver spones
      6 forks

And out of factory, viz.:--

    1 silver spout pott.
    1 sillver standing cup and cover, all guilt.

  my owne.
    And 1 china ewer of coconutt
    1 case of 6 knives
  all my owne.
    More, 4 tobaco pipes
          2 all silver
          2 head and foote selver
    1 littell silver cupp to drink strong water

to goe on our voyage for Edo.

Towardes night the king sent to me to know what I would have donne
with the Englishmen presoners at Cochie, and whether I would pay the
money they weare kept for, for that they weare subjectes to the kings
of Xasma, Crates, Chicongo, and other places, and would, yf I paid not
the money, carry them away. Unto which I answerd that it weare men of
Firando which detayned them, and, namely, one Cuze Dono, our next
neighbour, and others, contrary to the kinges comand that non should
trust them except they brought money; and, yf they weare of other
kingdoms which detayned them, I knew noe reason they should have more
preveleges then them of Firando, in regard the Emperour had comanded
that we should carry noe Japons out in our shipps, it was noe reason
that Japons should detayne Englishmen per force and fayne debtes upon
them which they owed not, as these Japons did, and took men and kept
them presoners which owed them nothing. And for me to pay money for
their releasment, I could not, they being sea men, and the English
admerall having geven me order to the contrary, he first having sent      227
150 R. of 8 to have redemed them, and 10 R. more was offered, but all
refused, and our men detained per force against all reason. Soe I
could say nothing till the fleete retorned; but in the meane tyme
willed them take heed how they sent them to be disposed of per our
enemies, as they would answer it to themperor.

_November 30_ (_Junguach 27_).--We and the Hollanders sett forwardes
towardes Edo, but, the wind being N.erly with rayne, we went into an
Iland of Firando called Onshma, 3 leagues from Firando.

But, before we went out, the Japons of Cochie came to our English
howse, bawling and crying out for payment of the money thenglishmen
owed them, or else they would cary them away and make their best of
them. I answerd I would not consent they should cary them away, nether
would pay them any thing, for that they weare villens and had imagened
falce debtes, saying English men owed them money when they owed them
non; and that, yf I weare not now ready to set my foote into the bark
to departe towardes themperours Court, I would have laid them all by
the heeles till our men were set at liberty.

Also the king sent 2 men, our enemis, after me, to tell me the
Hollanders had lent hym 6,000 _taies_, and I denied to lend any, and
bad them tell me he had noe need of any money, and therefore sent them
to tell me soe much. But I sent his Highnesse word that I had left
order with Mr. Eaton to lett hym have silk with mantas or lynen cloth
and other matters to the vallue of 3000 _tais_, at same price the
Hollanders lett his Highnesse have theirs; but, for money, I had non,
as many in Firando knew it well, and, to take up money at intrest and
lend it out for nothing, I knew not how to geve our honble. employers
acco. of it; yet, yf his Highnesse would needes have it soe, it must
be soe. But the _jurebasso_, Nicolas Martyn, sent from the king, tould
me that the 3000 _tais_ I offerd was well, and would be taken in as       228
good part as 6000 of the Hollanders, and that the other two which came
(would not com abord) were our enemies, and had enformed the king of
untruthes.

The dansing beares came out after us, and I gave them a bar of plate
containing 4 _ta._ 7 _ma._, and Capt. Camps as much.

_December 1_ (_Junguach 28_).--After midnight we departed from
Onushma, and went to Ginushma before the wind turned, haveing made 38
leagues.

_December 2_ (_Junguach 29_).--This morning, after sunne rising, we
departed from Ginushma, and wind at W.N.W., and soe contynewd all day
and night following. Soe at 2 a clock after nowne we arived at Ximina
Seak,[109] and fownd the Hollanders departed from thence 2 howers
before, Capt. Camps having left me a letter, and Stroyemon Dono
another that Gonrok Dono departed from thence yistarday; soe they took
councell to follow hym, that Stroyemon Dono might be at Edo before
him. Soe I left a letter with our host at Ximina Seak to send to Mr.
Eaton, dated this day of our arivall at this place, and that he should
lett the king of Firando have all the kense (?) silk and bleu lynen at
as loe a rate as the Hollanders sould theirs, as also the money which
the 2 peces broad cloth weare sould for, and, yf any thing wanted to
make up 3000 _taies_, to let hym have it in money or comodities.

Soe this day and night we got 42 leagues, 8 leagues short of Camina
Seak,[110] at sun rising.

     [109] Shimonoseki.

     [110] Kaminoseki.

_December 3_ (_Shimutsque 1_).--This day till night we made 18 leagues
to a villadge called Ewe,[111] 10 leagues past Camina Seak, where we
overtook the Hollanders, and rod at an ancor all night.

     [111] Yu.

_December 4_ (_Shimutsque 2_).--We staid heare all day per meanes of      229
contrary wind and an overgrowen sea, and the Hollanders and _bongews_
came to dyner abord our bark.

_December 5_ (_Shimutsque 3_).--We departed from Ewe and rowed 2
leagues to a place called Zewa; and in the way saw a bark cast away,
and sent out our and the Hollanders small boates, whoe saved the men.

_December 6_ (_Shimutsque 4_).--At night we departed from Zewa, it
being calme, and rowed it xiij leagues before we came to an ancor. We
paid xv. _mas_ to howse and for oringes at Zewa, and gave a sack of
rise to the men which we saved out of the wreck, they being of Bongo.

_December 7_ (_Shimutsque 5_).--We arived within night at Bingana
Tomo, wheare I went ashore and made consort for [neales, spikes, and
iron hoopes].

Soe we made this day 15 leagues till night.

_December 8_ (_Shimutsque 6_).--We departed from Bingana Tomo at
midnight past, and got this day to Moro before sunne seting, having
made 30 leagues, with such extreame wynde that we weare not able to
beare but very littell seale. The Hollanders bark went out 2 howers
before us, yet we overtook her and out went her 2 leagues before we
weare aware, yet went into Moro together. And here we understood
Gonrok Dono went from hence 2 daies past.

_December 9_ (_Shimutsque 7_).--We departed from Moro at xj a clock
before nowne, and arived at Fiongo[112] within night, having made xvij
leagues this day, not without danger, seeing a greate bark, laden with
rise, cast away in passing the straits at Fiongo.

     [112] Hôgo.

_December 11_ (_Shimutsque 9_).--We departed this morning from Fiongo,
having laden 2 barkes first with our merchandiz, to lighten our bark,
she drawing much water, and now nepe tides.

And the Hollanders did the like. Yet, as we passed the flattes of
Osackay, we were on grownd divers tymes; yet, God be praised, we gott     230
well affe againe, and arived at Osackay at 3 a clock in thafter nowne;
but at same place saw one bark cast away, laden with stones for the
making of the castell, but all the people saved.

_December 13_ (_Shimutsque 11_).--Our host, Cuemon Dono, the night
past sent for whole company of _caboques_, and made a play with good
cheare; and we gave them 2 barrs plate, is 8: 6: 0.

Soe we departed towardes Miaco, and arived theare this evening at
night, and, passing by Fushamy, mett with Gonrok Donos clark, whoe
tould us his master was theare and ment not to departe from Miaco of 5
or 6 daies.

_December 14_ (_Shimutsque 12_).--This night at sun seting Capt. Camps
arived at Miaco.

_December 15_ (_Shimutsque 13_).--I wrot 2 letters to Osackay, viz. 1
to Tozamon Dono that I left order at Bingana Tomo to pay 300 _tais_
plate bars to our hostis, also to provide 30 great pottes and 200
small of white salt against my retorne from Edo; 1 to the mother of
Helena, that I had order from Mr. Eaton to have spoaken with her about
their doughter, but could not stay till my retorne from Edo.

And we made ready these presentes and delivered them, viz.:--

To Suga Dono, Cheefe Justis,

  10 _cattis_ raw silk.
  01 _tatta._ stamet cloth.
  05 peces ordnary damasks.
  03 peces redd sayes.
  05 peces ord. taffeties.
  in velvet bags.
    25 _cattis_ cloves
    25 _cattis_ pepper

To Inga Dono, his father,

  25 _cattis_ cloves, in velvet bag.
  03 peces blak chauul taffeties.
  05 peces ordnary taffeties.

To Channo Shozero Dono,                                                   231

  15 _cattis_ raw silk.
  01 _tatta._ stamet cloth.
  05 peces black cawul taffety.
  03 peces redd sayes.
  25 _cattis_ cloves, in a velvet bagg.

_December 16_ (_Shimutsque 14_).--Our host at Cousattes[113] sent his
man with a present of chistnuttes 7 leagues to bid me wellcom, and I
gave the fello 5 _mas_ which brought them.

This day we got out our letters of favor from the justis of Miaco and
Chawno Shozero Dono.

     [113] Kusatsu.

_December 17_ (_Shimutsque 15_).--We departed from Miaco this day, and
went to Cousates to bed, having made this day 7 leagues. And in the
way followed us 4 companies with bankettes Japon fation, viz. 1 from
ostes servantes, 1 from Tome Donos brother, 1 from kinsman of our
host, 1 from Maky Shozemon Dono; unto which 4 Mr. Osterwick gave 4
_ichebos_ of gould.

Soe we got to Cousattes this night, our hostes name Yoichero Dono; and
paid for supper and breckfast 3 _ichebos_, and 3 C. _gins_ to the
servantes of howse.

_December 18_ (_Shimutsque 16_).--We went to dyner to Minna
Cochie,[114] our hostes name Ishia Dono; and paid i _ichebo_ to howse
and ij C. _gins_ to servantes. Soe went to bedd to Shequenogize, the
hostes name Ichezayemon Dono, having made xiij leagues this day.

     [114] Minakuchi.

_December 19_ (_Shimutsque 17_).--We dyned this day at Youkaich, 7
leagues, our hostes name called Ishiais Taffio Dono; and went to bed
to Quanno,[115] 4 leagues more.

     [115] Kuwana.

_December 20_ (_Shimutsque 18_).--We went to Mia[116] from Quanno, 7
leagues per sea, and dyned at Fox, my hostes. And from thence went to
bed to Cherew,[117] host called Sangusque Dono, and made 12 leagues.

     [116] Miya.

     [117] Chiriu.

_December 21_ (_Shimutsque 19_).--We went to dyner to Fugecaw,[118]       232
4-1/2 leagues, the hostes name Crozemon Dono, and from thence went to
Yoshenda,[119] 5-1/2 leagues, the hostes name Yamanda Sinimon Dono, to
bedd. Here was a howse set on fire neare our lodging, yet sowne
quenched, otherwais we had our horses redy to depart.

     [118] Fujikawa.

     [119] Yoshida.

_December 22_ (_Shimutsque 20_).--We went to dyner to Array,[120] 5
leagues; and went to Hammamach[121] to supper, 4 leagues mor; the
hostes name Sozero Dono, at Arrais, and heare at Hamamach, Ummea
Ichazemon Dono.

     [120] Arai.

     [121] Hamamatsu.

_December 23_ (_Shimutsque 21_).--We went to dyner to Cagingaua,[122]
7 leagues, and to supper to Canayea;[123] the host at Cagengaua called
Yasozemon Dono, and at Canayea, Soyemon Dono.

     [122] Kakegawa.

     [123] Kanaya.

_December 24_ (_Shimutsque 22_).--We went to dyner at Ocaby,[124] 5
leagues, and to soper to Egery,[125] 6 leagues; the hostes name at
[Ocaby] Groboye Dono, and at thother, Ficobuye Dono.

     [124] Okabe.

     [125] Ejiri.

_December 25_ (_Shimutsque 23_).--We went to dyner to Ishwary,[126] 7
leagues, and to supper to Mishma,[127] 5 leagues; the name of the host
at Ishwary Skozemon Dono, and other Seden. Here we kept Christmas.

     [126] Yoshiwara.

     [127] Mishima.

_December 26_ (_Shimutsque 24_).--We went to dyner to Odoro,[128] 8
leagues, the hostes name Nacafaroya Genimon Dono; and to soper to
Oyesso,[129] 4 leagues, host named Matobio Dono.

     [128] Odawara.

     [129] Oiso.

_December 27_ (_Shimutsque 25_).--We went to dyner to Todsque,[130] 6
leagues, the hostes name Cutero Dono; and to supper to Caninggaw,[131]
3 leagues, the hostes name Ginemon Dono.

At Caningaw I receved 4 letters from Edo, viz. 1 from Cacazezemon         233
Dono, 1 from Stroyemon Dono, 1 from Capt. Adames sonne Isack, and 1
from Sobioye Dono, secretary to Gentero Dono.

     [130] Totska.

     [131] Kanagawa.

_December 28_ (_Shimutsque 26_).--We stoped at a pleace 2 leagues
short of Edo, called Suningaua,[132] the hostes name Gembio Dono,
where Capt. Adames 2 children mett us with a present of _muchas_ and 2
rosted hens and a _baroso_ wyne; as also Gentero Dono sent us 2 horses
and other two for the Hollanders, with a _bongew_ to bidd us wellcom,
as the admerall Shungo Donos sonne sent his man to bid us wellcom.

Soe we arived this day after nowne at Edo. And the King of Firando's
brother sent me a present of _muchas_, and withall to tell me I was
wellcom. And Cacazemon Dono envited the Hollanders and us to super,
where we had great cheare, with many good wordes, and amongst the rest
tould us that the Portingalles came not to sight of the Emperour,
nether would he let them have _goshons_ for their shiping from Amacon
to traffick to Japan.

     [132] Shinagawa.

_December 29_ (_Shimutsque 27_).--I rec. a letter from Shongo Dono,
with 10 hens for a present. And I deliverd the 2 _cattans_ and
_wacadash_ of Capt. Adames, left per will to his sonne Joseph; where
were teares shedd at delivery.

_December 30_ (_Shimutsque 28_).--We went to vizet Gentero Dono, the
King of Firandos brother, and carid hym a present as followeth:--

  01 _tatta._ stamet cloth.
  10 _cattis_ white silke.
  25 _cattis_ cloves, in a velvet sack.
  03 peces redd sayes.
  03 peces ord. taffetis.
  05 pec. ordnary damaskes.

from us and the Hollanders; which he took in good parte, and gave us
kynd entertaynment.

_December 31_ (_Shimutsque 29_).--We carid and delivered presentes        234
this day, viz.:--

  25 _cattis_ raw whit silk.
  02 _tatta_ stamet cloth.
  03 peces rich crimson damaskes.
  05 peces ordenary damaskes.
  05 peces redd silk sayes.

to Otto Dono.

And the like to Itania Quenusque Dono.

And to the secretary of Otto Dono:--

  1 pec. ordenery damask.
  4 peces ordnary taffetis.

To Quenosque Donos secretary:--

  1 pec. ordnary damask.
  1 pec. ordnary taffite.

_January 1, 162-1/2_ (_Shimutsque 30_).--We made ready our present
bordes this day; and had order to vizet a nobellman to morow.

_January 3_ (_Shiwas 2_).--The King of Firandos brother, Jentero Dono,
came to my lodging to vizet me, as Capt. Camps did the like; unto
whome I gave the best entertaynment I could, and soe they departed.
But Capt. Camps came first, and soe we sett downe the quantety of 3
presentes to be geven, viz. 1 to the prince, themperours sonne; 2 to
the 2 cheefe justices of Edo, per adviz from King Firando. Also we
understand themperour will be heare within 3 dayes.

_January 4_ (_Shiwas 3_).--Cacazemon Dono sent me word that themperour
will be at Edo this night, but that Oyen Dono, his master, will not be
heare till two daies after, yet wisheth us to make all thinges ready,
which we will geve in presentes, as also to put in writing our
petision what we demand, because we may be dispached before the Japon
new yeare, which is the first day of next moone.

Towardes night Chawno Shozero Donos brother sent me word themperour       235
was arived; and Capt. Camps sent me word it was best to vizet the 2
justices at Edo to morow with presentes.

_January 6_ (_Shiwas 5_).--There were presentes geven this day, as
followeth:--

  To Matzera Dayre Jemon Dono.
  To Caffia Dono, _goshon_ seale keeper.
  To Enoquena Cambo Dono, a _mackey bongew_.
  To Gentero Donos secretary.
  To his man brought us horses on the way.
  To Maczera Dayres secretary.
  To Caffia Donos secretary.
  To _mache bongews_ secretary.

And Itamia Quenusque Dono, on of themperours councell, sent me 2 wild
geese for a present, and withall advized me that we weare to goe vizet
themperour with our present the xvth day of this moone, which is x
dayes hence.

This morning, 2 howrs before day, was an earthquake.

_January 7_ (_Shiwas 6_).--Cacayemon Dono came to vizet me, and tould
me his master, Oyen Dono, would be heare to night, and gave me
councell what we should say to his master when our plito about the
friggat was broght in question, and that I should mak as much knowne
to the Hollanders; he now thinking it could not goe against us, we
having fownd and proved the presoners to be padres or frires.

_January 8_ (_Shiwas 7_).--Cacayemon Dono sent me word his master,
Oyen Dono, retorned yisternight. Soe I send our _jurebasso_ with the
Hollandars theirs to kiss his Lo. handes on our behalfe, and to tell
hym of our arivall heare, and to know his pleasure when we should com
to speech with hym.

_January 9_ (_Shiwas 8_).--About 10 a clock this day was an earthquake,
which shooke a good while 2 severall tymes.

We envited the Hollanders to dyner with Cacazemon Dono, Stroyemon         236
Dono, and Jentero Donos secretary; and had the dansing beares.

_January 10_ (_Shiwas 9_).--We carid our present to Oyen Dono as
followeth, viz.:--

  50 _cattis_ white twisted silke.
  50 _cattis_ white raw silke.
  03 _tatta._ stamet broad cloth.
  07 peces ordnary damaskes.
  07 peces red cheremis.
  07 peces white cheremis.
  05 peces ruch crimson damaskes.
  in velvet bagges.
    50 _cattis_ cloves
    50 _cattis_ peper

He took it in very good parte, and gave us frendly speeches and made
us colation.

_January 12_ (_Shiwas 11_).--We dyned at Holland howse, where we had
good cheare, with the _caboques_.

_January 13_ (_Shiwas 12_).--Jentero Donos secretary sent me halfe a
beefe, and the other halfe to Capt. Camps; but it was kild in the
night, for non may be kild heare per themperors comand.

_January 14_ (_Shiwas 13_).--We went this day, and deliverd our
present to Cacazemon Dono, both Capt. Camps and my selfe, to Oyen
Donos secretary, our espetiall frend.

_January 15_ (_Shiwas 14_).--We and the Hollanders carid our present
to Codgskin Dono, who came hither but yistarnight, although it was
said he arived heare 7 daies past.

And I rec. a letter from Firando from Mr. Eaton, dated the 18th and
kept till the 22th ultimo, wherin he writes that the King of Firando
or his offecars have let the Japons cary 3 of our men to Nangasaque to
sell them to the Spaniardes; and that the Japons are kept presoners in
our howse still; and that Torazamon Dono sent hym word he should geve
them meate and drink, which he retorned answer I had left order to the
contrary.

_January 16_ (_Shiwas 15_).--We and the Hollanders carid our present
to themperour, viz.:--

  200 _cattis_ white raw silk.                                            237
  100 _cattis_ white pole silk.
  050 _cattis_ white twisted silke.
  002 peces stamet clo., containing 16 _tatta._
  005 peces rich crimson damask.
  005 peces ruch blak sattins.
  015 peces redd cheremis.
  015 peces white cheremis.
  005 peces damask tabling.
  005 peces Sleze lawnds.
  003 faggottes of steele.
  300 _cattis_ of cloves.

_January 18_ (_Shiwas 17_).--I wrot to Mr. Eaton not to lett our men
goe with Jno. Jossens junck, nor geve meate to the Japon presoners in
our howse.

_January 19_ (_Shiwas 18_).--We carid our presentes to themperours
sonne and his governor:--

  50 _cattis_ white raw silk.
  25 _cattis_ cloves, in velvet bagg.
  05 _tattamis_ stamet brod clo.
  05 peces ruch crimson damaskes.
  05 peces ruch wroght black sattin.
  05 peces damask tabling.
  05 peces damask napkening.

to Dayeynanga Samma, the Emperours sonne.

  25 _cattis_ pepper, in velvett bagg.
  10 _cattis_ white raw silke.
  05 peces ordnary taffeties.
  01 _tattamy_ stamet broad clo.

to Sacky Bingo Dono, his governor or secretary.

_January 20_ (_Shiwas 19_).--Capt. Camps came to me to tell me the
_bongews_ put hym in mynd to geve a present to the father of the King
of Firandos queene, as well as to her; but he was of opinion (as I the
like) that we ment not to geve any to the doughter but for the
husbandes sake, nether to her yf the king had byn heare; only this is
in respeckt she is queene of Firando and now greate with childe, and
we the first which came to Edo after the mariadge, the king being
absent, and never to be looked for hereafter. But, yf we should           238
now geve a present to her father, it must allwais contynew hereafter,
for the Japons still encroche, and aske but geve nothing, nether to
say the truth we have geaven away all allready, that nothing of worth
restes to geve.

_January 21_ (_Shiwas 20_).--I went to Capt. Camps to take councell
what we were best to doe about delivering our petition to the
Emperours councell to have our oulde preveleges confermed to cary out
men and munition our shipps in payment for it, as we have donne in
tymes past. But Cacazemon Dono, Oyen Donos secretary, sent us word we
were best to stay till the councell advized us to make knowne unto
them yf we were greved in any thinge and we should be remedied, and
then we might mak our case knowne; otherwais, yf we went about to doe
it before that tyme, it would be throwne by, and noe respect had unto
it. Soe we aledged we dowbted then we should be detayned here over
long; but they promised the contrary.

_January 22_ (_Shiwas 21_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to the Court to
procure out our _goshon_ (or dispach); but he retorned without doing
any thing.

_January 23_ (_Shiwas 22_).--We and the Hollanders went to dyner to
the King of Firandos howse, being envited per Jentero Dono, his
brother, and were very well entertayned; and carid a present to the
Queene of Firando as followeth:--

  25 _cattis_ white raw silke.
  01 _tatta_ stamet cloth.
  03 peces ruch crimson damaskes.
  05 peces of redd sayes.

We did this in respect she is Queene of Firando and now greate with
childe, and within short tyme to goe from hence for Firando, she not
having byn theare as yett.

_January 24_ (_Shiwas 23_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to thank the
prince of Firando for our kynd entertaynment yistarday; and, after,       239
I sent hym to the Court to procure our dispach, but could effect
nothing.

_January 25_ (_Shiwas 24_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ againe to the
Court to procure our dispach; but he retorned without doing any thing.
Only the councell gave hym fare wordes, and bad hym com againe to
morrow. And towardes night Stroyemon Dono and Cacazemon Dono sent me
word we should have our dispach before the new moone; which God grant.

_January 26_ (_Shiwas 25_).--The King of Firandos brother accompanid
with other 2 noble men of themperours followers, one of 8 _mangocas_,
and the other of 3 per anno, came to vizet me and to heare som musick,
unto whome I gave the best entertaynment I could; and from hence they
went to the Hollands howse to vizet Capt. Camps.

Also I sent our _jurebasso_ to the Court to procure our dispach; but
retorned without doing any thing. And our _bongew_, Stroyemon Dono,
and Cacazemon Dono tell us now we must of force stay heare till after
the feast, before we can have our dispach. Also they say Gonrok Dono
will be heare this night.

_January 27_ (_Shiwas 26_).--The Queene of Firando sent me a present
per her secretary, with the like to Capt. Camps, viz.:--

  2 silk coates or _kerremons_ with watta.
  2 barills of wyne of Japon.
  2 wild geese.

_January 28_ (_Shiwas 27_).--Cacazemon Dono and Stroyemon Dono came to
vizet me, and tould me that Oyen Dono said that themperour did esteeme
of our nations more then ever, by meanes we had soe well defended our
selves in our plito against the padres, and that we should be
dispached shortly to our content. Also they tould me that the sonne of
Masseamon Dono would com to vizet both us and the Hollanders to morow,
which we agreed should be at Hollanders lodging, it being more
comodious than ours.

Also our _jurebasso_ was at Court all day, and procured nothing.          240

_January 29_ (_Shiwas 28_).--The Hollanders and we kept within dores
all this day, attending the coming of Massamone his sonne, hoe sent
word he would com and see us and take accoyntance with us; but came
not. Nether could we doe any thing for our dispach, being now answerd
we must attend 8 days more till the cheefe of the feast be past.

_January 30_ (_Shiwas 29_).--We went and deliverd our presentes to the
admerall Shongo Dono, and his ould father Fiongo Dono. We were very
kyndly entertayned at both howses, espetially at Shongo Donos, with a
bankett of _chaw_, Spanish wyne, and other matters extraordenary.

And soe we went to Hollanders to dyner, and they came to us to supper,
we having in thafter nowne vizeted the pagod of Ottongo Fachemon, the
god of war, which out of dowbt is the devill, for his pickture sheweth
it, made in forme as they paint the devill, and mounted upon a wild
bore without bridell or saddell, and hath wings on his shoulders, as
Mercury is paynted to have.

_February 1_ (_Shonguach 1_).--We gave presentes this Japon new years
day, viz.:--

1 pec. ordnary damask to Mrs. Adams.

1 pec. ordnary taffety to her sonne Joseph.

1 pec. ditto to her doughter Susanna.

1 pec. ditto to Jenquese Dono, her good man.

And I gave iij M. _gins_ to the dansing bears.

And I sent Capt. Camps, viz.:--

  1 gamon bacon.
  1 pec. Martelmas beefe.
  3 drid netestonges.
  5 duble peper botrago.[133]
  10 Bolonia sausages.

     [133] Span., _botarga_, a kind of sausage.

_February 2_ (_Shonguach 2_).--The _bongews_ sent us word we could not
goe to vizet the Emperour nor his councell till the 6th of this moone     241
at least; but tould us it were good we sent our _jurebassos_ to vizet
Jentero Samma, the King of Firandos brother, and Cacazemon Dono, with
each a present of 10 bundelles paper of fyve, 6, or 7 _mas_ per
bundell, and 5 bundelles dito to Jentero Donos secretary.

_February 4_ (_Shonguach 4_).--Capt. Camps and we went to see the
cytty and a great pagod called Assackxa, dedicated to a Japon saint
(or rather deavill) called Quannow. We gave 1000 _gins_ to the _bose_
to shew it us, and 2 _ichebos_ to an other _bos_ where we banqueted.

_February 5_ (_Shonguach 5_).--I went with Capt. Camps to the howse of
Oyen Dono, themperours secretary, to have delivered hym a present of a
peece of currall containing 2-1/2 _taies_, and a _catty_ wight rich
campher, and to wish hym a good new yeare; but he was gon out to vizet
the prince, themperours sonne.

And Cacazemon Dono and Stroyemon Dono came to vizet me, the first
bringing me a present of wallnuttes and a salt salmon.

_February 7_ (_Shonguach 7_).--We dyned all at Hollandes lodging this
day, where we fownd Stroyemon Dono and Gentero Donos secretary. And,
as we weare at dyner, came word Torazemon Dono was arived. Soe Capt.
Camps and I sent our _jurebasso_ to bid hym wellcom.

_February 8_ (_Shonguach 8_).--Torazemon Dono sent me a present of 2
_barsos_ wine, 2 wilduckes, and a great fresh barbell.

And I rec. by hym a letter from Mr. Eaton, dated in Firando the 26th
December, with 2 others from Tome _jurebasso_ and Jno. _jurebasso_,
how they have delivered 3000 _taies_ in merchandiz and money to King
of Firando, lent to hym, and that the Japons have sent our English men
to Nangasaque to sell them to Spaniardes.

_February 9_ (_Shonguach 9_).--Mr. Eaton wrot me in his letter how the
Japons at Cochie had beate the Hollanders pilot and an other marrenar
at Cochie, that they left them for dead; and the reason was because       242
they would not deliver them back our 6 English men which weare fled
abord for releefe; and that they used both us and the Hollanders soe
villanosly that it was insufferable.

_February 10_ (_Shonguach 10_).--We sent Mr. Osterwick with our 2
_jurebassos_ for thenglish and Duch, to deliver our petition to Otto
Dono, the kinges councellor; but he would not receve it, but bad them
com againe to morrow and deliver it before the whole Councell, for
that he hym selfe would not receve it.

_February 11_ (_Shonguach 11_).--Capt. Camps and I went vizet
Torazemon Dono, and carid a present because of the new year, telling
hym we did not present it for a present, but for a custom of the new
yeare, not to goe emptie handed to a man of his qualletye and our
espetiall frend. And at same tyme came Jentero Donos secretary with
Shroyemon Dono, the _bongew_, and Cacazemon Dono, with an other of
themperours men, which I esteemed to be an espie sent of purpose to
heare what we said. For Torazemon Dono was somthing forward in his
speeches, saying Mr. Eaton had refused to geve meate to the Japon
presoners left in our English howse by comandment of the King of
Firando and Gonrok Dono. But I answerd that I left order with Mr.
Eaton soe to do, and that we had no processe against those Japons,
which yf Gonrok Dono had let hym fynd a preson out of thenglish howse
and meate for them....

_February 12_ (_Shonguach 12_).--There was an earthquake about sunne
setting.

_February 13_ (_Shonguach 13_).--There was an other earthquake this
morning about an hower after sunne rising, but of small contynewance.

_February 14_ (_Shonguach 14_).--The Emperours councell sent us and
the Duch word that they would geve us noe absolute answer about our
petition till the King of Firando com hym selfe to Edo; but, for the
rest, the Emperour would geve us leave to departe within 3 or 4 daies.

_February 15_ (_Shonguach 15_).--I took councell with Capt. Camps to      243
make a demand to Torazemon Dono about the sending our men to
Nangasaque to sell them, contrary to his promise and the king his
master, at our departure from Firando. And Torazemon denied that our
men were not sent to Nangasaque, nor that the king knew nothing
thereof. Soe then I produced the 2 letters sent from our _jurebassos_,
to conferme it.

_February 16_ (_Shonguach 16_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to Court to
procure our dispach, but could effect nothing; only they said the
feast of the berth of the yong prince (themperours eldest sonne) was
celebrated this day, and to morow the anniversary or dying day of
Ogosho Samma is to be celebrated.

_February 17_ (_Shonguach 17_).--I wrot a letter to Firando to Mr.
Eaton and Mr. Hatch, of arival heare of Gonrok Dono and Torazemon
Dono; and that now we must stay for an answer of our petision till the
King of Firando com hym selfe; and that Torazemon Dono denieth that
our Englishmen are not sent to Nangasaque to be sould, neither knoweth
the King of Firando any such matter; and that, for the rest, we hope
to be dispached within 4 or 5 daies, and leve our _jurebassos_ heare
for the rest till the King of Firando com, which, as we are enformed,
is now in the way; and that this day Capt. Camps and my selfe put in
writing our grevanses, to deliver them to Torazemon Dono and King
Firandos brother.

And Capt. Camps came and brought the articles which we ment to present
to the King of Firandos brother and to Torazemon Dono, wrot in Japons,
the coppies whereof we keepe; in which we laid open all our grevanses,
having remeaned soe many yeares in Japon and setled our selves at
Firando, when we might as well have made choise of any other province
in Japon, and now to be soe misused to have som of our people kild and
others extremly misused; and, lastly, others carid away captives to       244
be sould to our enemies; which yf it were not remedied, there was noe
staying for us in Japon. Unto which Torazemon Dono answered that all
should be amended and our people retorned, and that the King of
Firando, his master, knew nothing therof. But I dowbt all will prove
words, as hitherto we doe finde it. Yet Torazemon Dono sent word he
would now procure our dispach to content.

_February 18_ (_Shonguach 18_).--This morning, at break of day, there
was an earthquake, which shaked a greate while.

Capt. Camps and the Duch dyned with us this day, and envited thenglish
to dyner to morow, and, after, to see a play or _caboque_.

_February 19_ (_Shonguach 19_).--Capt. Camps envited us to dyner this
day, and, after, to a Japon play or commody, all plaied by men and
boyes, and noe woamen; at which was Torazemon Dono, with Jentero Donos
secretary and Stroyemon Dono, our _bongew_; and divers others brought
bankettes, as Capt. Camps host, Jno. Jossens sonne in lawe, and
others.

And at our retorne we found our hostis sistar, Madalina Samma, and her
husband Andrea, come from Oringaua; and she brought me a present of 2
wild duckes, with great shelfishes and 2 Japon _muches_ as bigg as
cheeses.

And late at night Yasimon Dono, Gonrok Donos clark, came to vizet me,
as he said, unknowne to his master, and tould me his master thought
much in that we and the Hollanders did vizet Chawno Shozero Dono at
Miaco and came not to hym, his howse being in the same streete, right
over against the other, and he, as he thought, in frenshipp with both
our nations. Unto which I answered that I did not know his Lordshipps
howse was in that street, nether that he was in Miaco; but, to the
contrary, was enformed he was at Fushamy; and therefore desired pardon
yf I had offended therin; and that I ment to vizet his Lordshippe         245
before I went from hence, as I made accompt Capt. Camps would doe the
like; only I was ashamed we had noe good thing to present his
Lordshipp withall, and to goe emptie handed to a personage of his
quallety was not good. But he answered me that was all one, whether we
carid a present or noe; only he knew we should be welcom and our
visetation taken in good parte; but I should not say he came to me.

_February 20_ (_Shonguach 20_).--We could doe nothing at Court this
day for our dispach, because it is a great feast, all the shops being
shut up and an end made of the feast of Shonguach.

Also Torazemon Dono, with the other gentelmen at play yistarday,
envited per Capt. Camps, did envite them selves for to morow to an
other Japon play to me, which I could not deny. Soe I envited Capt.
Camps and the Duch to it, with the Hollandes host, and Jno. Yossens
sonne, and the children and others of Capt. Adams, our host.

_February 21_ (_Shonguach 21_).--We went to the play and, as I passed
by the Hollanders lodging, I entred in and there found the King of
Fingo or Figen,[134] a brave yong man, and hath 50 _mangocas_ of rent
per anno. He went to see the Hollanders because on of the Hollanders
servantes had served hym before, and, as he tould me, ment to have com
to vizet me, had I not com thether. He used me with greate curtesie
and offered greate frenshipp to all our nation, yf we came into his
cuntrey.

     [134] ? Hizen, in Kiushiu.

_February 22_ (_Shonguach 22_).--The night past a greate noblemans
howse was burned near the Emperours pallas. His name is Catto Samma
Dono, King of Io, or Eyo.[135]

     [135] Iyo, in Shikoku.

_February 23_ (_Shonguach 23_).--Our hostis envited both us and the
Hollanders to dyner this day; and we envited the dansing beares at
night.

_February 26_ (_Shonguach 26_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to the Court      246
to procure our dispach, but effected nothing. Soe Capt. Camps and my
selfe thought to have gon to the Councell to have shewed our selves,
hoping it would have procured our spidiar dispach, and, to that
entent, sent word to Torazemon Dono and Stroyemon Dono to desire them
to accompanie us. But they retorned answer it were better we staid
this day, and they them selves would goe and see what they could doe,
which, yf it would not take effect, then we might goe to morrow or the
next day.

_February 27_ (_Shonguach 27_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to the Court,
to procure our despach, but effected nothing; only Otto Dono said to
our _jurebasso_ that he should write downe the names of the Duch and
English, and they should have answer to morow, for that he would shew
it to the rest of the Councell.

_February 28_ (_Shonguach 28_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ againe to the
Court to gett our dispach; but retorned without doing any thinge, they
saying it was a greate hollyday, but I could not understand for what
sainte.

_March 2_ (_Ninguach 1_).--Capt. Camps and I went to the Court betyme
this morning, and, per meanes of Cacazemon Dono, spoake with his
master Oyen Dono, desiring to have lycense to departe. And he gave us
good wordes and said it was trew we had staid heare a long tyme, but
now he would speake to themperour to get our dispach, and to that
entent we should send our _jurebassos_ to the Court to morow that the
rest of the Councell might see them, and then he would put them in
mynd to dispach us.

_March 3_ (_Ninguach 2_).--The Hollanders and we sent our _jurebassos_
to the Court to get our dispach. And they were answerd by the Councell
we should be dispached to morow; but I think it will be after a
skervie fation, for nether our _bongew_, Shroyemon Dono, nor Torazemon
Dono have com at us these 5 or 6 daies, nor soe much as sent to us.
Soe I think our matters at Firando will groe worse and worse, till we     247
be driven out of Japon.

There was an earthquake this evening about 9 a clock at night, which
shook much for a small tyme.

_March 4_ (_Ninguach 3_).--I sent our _jurebasso_ to Court, as the
Duch did the like, to procure our dispach; but had nothing but wordes,
saying they were busy in Councell about other matters, but would
remember us shortly. Soe I think (as Capt. Camps is of same opinion)
that they would keepe us heare till the King of Firando com, which it
may be will not be this 2 monthes.

_March 5_ (_Ninguach 4_).--I wrot 2 letters, viz. one to Skengro Dono
to Miaco, to give covart to the other to Mr. Eaton and Mr. Hatch at
Firando. In this letter I advized, yf any of our shiping came into
Japon before our retorne, to let them stay at Cochie and not com into
Firando, nor put their ordinance nor munision ashore.

_March 6_ (_Ninguach 5_).--Capt. Camps and I went to the Court, and
there staid till the Councell entred into themperours pallas, and then
spoake to them for our dispach, which now they have promised us
without feale shall be within 2 or 3 daies. Also Torazemon Dono sent
me two wilduckes for a present, and withall advized me our dispach
would now be shortly.

And, as I am enformed, there will be warrs shortly in Japon betwixt
themperour and his uncle; for themperour sent to hym to com and doe
his obesance, as other subjectes doe, or else he would take his
revenews from hym. But he retorned answer he owed hym noe such
service, and that yf he went about to take his inheritance from hym,
he would defend it by armes. Soe that 10 princes are sent to hym to
turne his mynd; yf not, then warrs will ensue.

_March 7_ (_Ninguach 6_).--Great aboundance of rayne per night, with
an earthquake at 9 a clock at night.

_March 8_ (_Ninguach 7_).--A stiffe gale most parte of day and night      248
following, which might be accompted a tuffon or harrecano, with
aboundance of rayne all day.

We could doe nothing about procuring our dispach this day, per means
of the tempestious wether.

_March 9_ (_Ninguach 8_).--The Hollanders and we sent our _jurebassos_
to the Court to get our dispach, but had nothing but feare wordes, as
allwais the like heretofore. Soe I went to Capt. Camps, to take
councell with hym what we were best to doe. And in the meane tyme,
while I was theare, Torazemon Dono, and Stroyemon Dono, our _bongew_,
came to our lodging. Soe I went and bade them welcom, and they staid
supper with me; and, amongst other speches, Torazemon Dono said it had
byn better for us to have followd the King of Firandos councell, and
kept Capt. Speck heare, which, by meanes of the Comander Johnson and
others, was refuced, and now we saw how matters went forward. Unto
whome I answered that thenglish were not in falt that he went away;
"but," said I, "what could Capt. Speck doe heare now (yf he were here)
then Capt. Camps hath donne?" Unto which he knew noe other answer but
it was true; yet this Emperour of Japon was not soe easy to be spoaken
with as his father was. Unto which I answered I knew not that, but for
the King Firando he ought to heare us, we refusing all other kinges of
Japon to settel our selves only in his cuntrey, when we might as well
have donne it in another. He used som wordes that by meanes of our
residence in his cuntrey, he was put to much more charges then
heretofore about building fortresses. In fine, I think all will be
nought, the king being a yong man and harkning to yong councell, which
may deceave hym as it did Roboam, King Sollomans sonne. Once I dowbt
this Torazemon Dono is our secret enemie, and I have the like opinion
of Coa Jno., our _jurebasso_, although he be a very asse, yet he
secretly doth what he can against us.

_March 11_ (_Ninguach 10_).--Torazemon Dono sent for Capt. Camps and      249
me to com to hym, for that he had something to tell us from Oyen Dono,
themperours secretary. Soe we went to his howse, where we mett
Cacazemon Dono, Stroyemon Dono, and Jentero Donos secretary. And they
tould us that, tuching the priz goodes in the friggot, the Japons said
it was theirs, and not the Spaniardes or Portingales, but themperour
would not beleeve them, for that we had proved them tretors in
bringing padres into Japon, contrary to his comandement. Yet,
notwithstanding, Oyen Dono desired to have our and the Hollanders
_jurebassos_ with Stroyemon Dono, our _bongew_, to com in private to
hym to morrow, to shew unto hym the truth, what belonged to the
Spaniardes and Portingals and what to the Japons. Soe we agreed upon
it, and withall tould them we never ment to withould anything from the
Japons, and, for the fardells of silk and other matters which the
Japons fathered, there was ticketes in them which shewed to whome they
belonged, and their names written in Spanish and Portugez, all which
we made knowne unto them for their better remembrance to morow. Soe we
had kynd entertaynment and full promis to be dispached within a day or
two without faile, with many complementall wordes both from Cacazemon
Dono and the rest.

_March 13_ (_Ninguach 12_).--Our pilot of Sackay, which brought us
from Firando to Osacky, came to viset me, he coming from Sacky by sea
in a greate bark laden with salte, and was 2 months in the way; and he
sayeth that with the storme few daies past many barkes were cast away
coming in company with hym, and all the people lost, his bark not
escaping without greate danger; this being the 34th voyadg he hath
made from Sacky to this place.

The Hollanders and we sent our _jurebassos_ to Court to get our
dispach; but had nothing but fayre wordes as heretofore, only they
said that themperours Councell receved the King of Fingo this day and
feasted hym, which hindered our dispach, but to morow they would doe
it.

_March 14_ (_Ninguach 13_).--We sent our _jurebassos_ to Court to         250
procure our dispach. Soe they had answer that our dispach was granted,
and to morow themperour would send us his present, and then we might
departe when we would.

_March 15_ (_Ninguach 14_).--Capt. Camps and I apointed to morow to
goe to the nobles to take our leave and thank them for our dispach,
and soe to dispach our selves out of Edo.

Also this night, about 10 a clock, was an earthquake, but not of much
contynewance.

And about midnight was a fire in the towne, and much hurleburly.

_March 16_ (_Ninguach 15_).--Capt. Camps and I, with Mr. Osterwick,
went to Torazemon Dono to thank hym for the paines he had taken about
our busynes heare, and withall did deliver unto hym a writing
conserning the abuses offered unto us and our nation at Firando, in
keeping of our men presoners and sending them to Nangasaque to sell
them to our enemis, and make our howse a preson for the Japons,
against whome we had no plito. Unto which he answerd we had reason in
what we said, and that the King of Firando knew nothing thereof, and
therfore all should be amended to our content; and that the presoners
Japons were kept per ordenance of Gonrok Dono, and not per the King of
Firando.

And as Capt. Camps and I were about to goe to thank the nobles for our
dispach, word was brought us we might departe when we would, and leave
som one behind us to receve the present themperour ment to geve us,
for that as yet it was not ready; which truly is the greatest wrong or
indignety that eaver hitherto was offered to any Christians, and I
think is donne of purpose per meanes of the King of Firando, whose
mother is a papisticall Jesuist, and he and the rest of his bretheren
and sisters papisticall Christians. Soe that I think it is impossible     251
that we shall eaver have good entertaynment in his cuntrey. God send
me and the rest of our nation well out of it.

_March 17_ (_Ninguach 16_).--Capt. Camps and my selfe went to the
Emperours Councell to take our leave, viz: to Oyen Dono, Codgque Dono,
Otto Dono, Ita Canusque Dono, the 4 princepall councellors. And we
spoake to Oyen Dono and Ita Canusque Dono, whoe gave us very good
wordes, and said they were ashamed we staid here soe long and that we
had not themperours present delivered to us before we went from hence,
but, yf we tarid 2 or 3 daies longer, it would be ready, or delivered
in our abcense to whome we pleased to receave it, yf we went away
before. But Codgsque Dono and Otto Dono were not at home, but hadd
left order with their secretaries to answer as the former. Soe we went
from thence to the lodging of Gonrok Dono, and carid hym a present
from us and the Hollanders. And Itamia Canusque Dono sent me 2 silke
coates or _kerremons_, and the like to the Duch.

I tould Capt. Camps I ment to vizet Shongo Dono, the admirall, and
cary hym a present of 1/2 a _catty_ of campher and a _tay_ wight of
currall, all at my owne coste, in respect of the frenship which was
betwixt Capt. Adames and hym, and to wish hym to contynew his favour
to his child, now the father was dead. But Capt. Camps fell into
collerik terms, and tould me I could not goe to hym nor non else
without his consent. Unto which I replied I might doe with my owne
what I list, and that I did not put this to the companis acco. Unto
which he answerd that I now went about to procure his disgrace, and to
get all the thanke to my selfe, in respeckt of a present was geven hym
both this yeare as also the last, which had it not byn for thenglish,
they would have given him nothing. Unto which I replied I knew nothing
of that which passed the last yeare, and, for that which was donne
this yeare, he might have chosen whether he would have geven it or no.    252
Yet there is suffitient witnesse he said he was sory he had not geven
more in respect of our good entertaynment. But it seemed Capt. Camps
was angry, for he tould me he had put up more indigneties at my hands
then this, which, God is my witnesse, I know not whereby he speaketh
it, for he hath contynewally ensulted over me, and thrust hym selfe
still before me into presence of themperour and his Councell, saying
his place was before myne in respect the Duch was admerall at sea in
the Manillias voyage this yeare. Yet I suffered all this with
pasyence, and let hym take his course; but to be master of my owne and
geve it to whome I list, I think I offerd hym no injury.

Also Oyen Dono, themperours cheefe secretary, brought me 5 silk coates
or _kerremons_ of silk (as I make acco. the Hollanders had the like)
with many complementall wordes; and out of these 5 coates I gave 2 to
Mr. Osterwick, 1 to Robt. Jones and 1 to Jno. Collins at recept
therof.

Also we gave these presentes following in our house:--

  5 _cattis_ white raw silk to Capt. Adams wyfe.
  to Madelina Samma, her sister.
    1 _catt._ white raw silk
    1 pece redd silk say
  1 _catty_ ditto silk to their ould mother.
  1 pece red cheremis to Susana, Capt. Adams doughter.
  1 halfe pece ruch crimson damask to Joseph his sonne.
  1 pece ornary damask to Andreas their uncle.
  1 pece ornary taffete to Maria their kinswoman.
  1 pece ornary taffety to Josephs schole master.
  1 pec. ditto to Yode Dono, their frend.
  1 pec. red cheremy to Robt. and Jnos. hostis.

We left order with Torazemon Dono to rec. our present from themperour
both for us and Hollanders, as also our petition for themperour; and I
left my _goshon_ with Andreas to get a new one out and send it to me.

_March 18_ (_Ninguach 17_).--We departed this day from Edo towards        253
Miaco, and went to bed to Canengaua,[136] 7 leagues. But we overtook
Captain Camps 2 leagues from Edo, and he out went us 3 leagues without
biding us farewell.

We gave 300 _taies_ to our hostis, for diet in our lodging at Edo for
the tyme we staid there, besids other extraordnary which came to above
80 _taies_ more. Soe we wanted 50 _taies_ to cleare all matters, which
I promised to send them from Miaco, God permiting.

And Andrea, with Capt. Adams 2 children, and Jenquese Dono,
accompanied us out of Edo, and brought us a duble banket, with our
presents bord man. Soe we gave the bringers ij _ichebos_ to make a
feast, and to the servantes in our hostes howse i _coban_ and i
_ichebo_; as also one _ichebo_ to our host at Suningaua,[137] 2
leagues from Edo, being there called in by Capt. Camps, otherwais we
had pased alonge; yet he went from us afterward, as above said.

     [136] Kanagawa.

     [137] Shinagawa.

_March 19_ (_Ninguach 18_).--We went to Oyesso (or Oiso) to dyner, 9
leagues, and to supper to Odora,[138] 4 leagues. And per the way we
overtook Stroyemon Dono, our _bongew_, whoe deliverd me xxviij _coban_
barrs of gould, as he did the like nomber to Capt. Camps, to employ
for Cacazemon Donos sonns best advantage when shiping cometh or
otherwais, the _coban_ vallued at 6 _ta._ 2 _m._ 5 _c._ per barr, is
175 _taies_; wherof I send back, per the servant of Cacazemon Dono, to
deliver to our hostis at Edo, Capt. Adames woaman, at rate abovesaid,
is 50 _taies_.

Capt. Camps had a letter in Japons how Cornelius died within 3 daies
after he arived from Osacky to Firando, and that the shipp departed to
Molucas.

     [138] Odawara.

_March 20_ (_Ninguach 19_).--We went from Odoro to Facana Yama[139] to
dyner, hostes name Jembio Dono; and to soper to Nomads,[140] hostes       254
name Tozemon Dono, having made 4 leagues before dyner and 5-1/2 after.

     [139] Hakone.

     [140] Numadsu.

_March 21_ (_Ninguach 20_).--We went to dyner to Cambar,[141] 6
leagues, the hostes name Sayemon Dono; and to supper to Egery,[142]
4-1/2 leagues, to our ould hostes howse as we went up.

     [141] Kambara.

     [142] Ejiri.

_March 22_ (_Ninguach 21_).--We went to dyner to Ocaby,[143] 6
leagues; and to supper to Canayea,[144] past the greate river, 5
leagues.

     [143] Okabe.

     [144] Kanaya.

_March 23_ (_Ninguach 22_).--We went to dyner to Fucore,[145] 7
leagues, hostes name Facherozamon Dono; and to supper to
Hammamach,[146] 6 leagues.

And by the way we met with Quiemon Dono, our barkman, or _sinde_,[147]
of Sackay, whoe brought me 3 letters from Mr. Eaton, 2 of one date,
3th of January, and both coppis verbatum, and an other of the 10th of
February; wherein he writes me all the Japon presoners which were in
our howse are sett at liberty; and that the Hollanders sent our 6
English men ashore againe which weare abord their shipp, being compeld
by Japons. Soe they carid them all to Nangasaque, and Jno. Yoosen hath
them in his handes and will not deliver them unto us, allthough Mr.
Eaton sent Ric. Hudson and a _jurebasso_ with hym to demand them,
offering to pay all the charges he hath disbursed. But he answered
that he would not deliver them, although the King of Firando and
Governor of Nangasaque comanded hym, for that he had mad ready his
junck and ment to send them to the Holland factory at Jaccatra, except
we would buy his junck and pay hym 20,000 _taies_ he had disbursed in
provitions to send thither. But the world knoweth that Yoosen is not
worth 20,000 pence.

Also this day, as we passed over a river, a _bongew_ of the King of       255
Faccatais men did misuse our horsmen, after our horses weare entred
into the bark, and would have put them out per force, because we weare
strangers. Whereupon they went together by the eares, and much a doe
there was about it. Soe that the _bongew_ of Faccata sent word it was
donne without his consent, and therefore, yf we brought out the
parties which did it, were they 1, 2, 3, or 4, he would put them to
death in our sight. But our horsmen weare soe bent because the Faccata
men had misused them, they being themperours men, that nothing would
serve them but the death of the others; which I would not consent
unto, but wished them to defer the matter till we came to Miaco, and
then we would bring it to passe before the justis theare. And
Stroyemon Dono, the King of Firandos _bongew_, was of the same
opinion; yet our horsmen weare not content. But in the end they agreed
among themselves.

     [145] Fakuroi.

     [146] Hamamatsu.

     [147] _Send[=o]_, a boatman.

_Marche 24_ (_Ninguach 23_).--This day we went to Aray[148] to dyner,
5 leagues; and to supper to Yoshenda,[149] 4 leagues. Heare our
_bongew_ and the Hollanders sliped from us and went to bed 5 leagues
ferther.

     [148] Arai.

     [149] Yoshida.
                                                                          256




                             APPENDIX.                                    257

                          CORRESPONDENCE.


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[150]


Right worshipfull,--

                  *     *     *     *     *     *

The 12th of June we came to an ancor in the haven of Firando, in
Japan, where the kinge of the place receaved us very kyndlie; Mr.
Adams not being theare, but had heard of our coming per meanes of a
letter sent from Sr. Thomas Smith, which caused hym to leave order
with his host to send a post to hym at our coming, which he did, and
our Generall wrot hym 3 severall letters, yet he arived not at Firando
till the 29th of July. And the 7th of August our Generall departed for
the Japan court, Mr. Adams accompanyinge hym. And it was the 6th
November before he did retorne for Firando, it provinge a tediouse
jorney. Yet he obtayned all priveleges that he did demand. God grant
the trade may prove as benefitiall as hetherto our succeadinges have
byn suckcesfull. The only crose hath byn the runinge away of 7 of our
marreners in the abcense of our Generall, viz. John Bowles,
Christopher Evans, Jno. Sars, Clement Lock, and Jno. Totty, Englishe
men, and Jasper Malconty, and one Jaques, Flemyngs; but Bowles and
Evans were the instigators of the rest. They stole away the skiffe and
went for Langasaque, and there took sanctuary in the papist churches,
and weare secretly convayed away for the Phillipinas per the              258
Jesuistes; but the skiffe we recovered againe.

The Flemynges had setled them selves heare 3 or 4 yeares before our
arivall, and have built them a howse in this place, which hath cost
them allready above 2500_l._ str.; and doe disperce them selves
abroade, som on way and som an other, to look out for trade, as we
must doe the lyke, for they are close and will let us understande
nothinge. They have som small entrance allready into Corea, per way of
an iland called Tushma, which standeth within sight of Corea and is
frend to the Emperor of Japan. But the chifest place which as yet they
have fownd out is from hence to Syam and Pattania, from whence they
bring silke, brasill wood, and deare skynns, which is all ready money
heare.

Mr. Adams is now entertayned into your Worships servis for a cupell of
yeares, untill news com of the _Cloves_ safe arivall in England,
he being now at libertie to com for his contrey when he will. He wold
not be entertayned under 100_l._ str. a yeare. The Flemynges did
what they could to have gotten hym from us, which made hym to stand
the more on his pointes. He aledged he was a pore man and that he had
spent 14 yeares allready to noe purpose, and now wold be loth to
retorne for his contrey a begger, gevinge the Worpll. Compa. humbly
thankes for his libertie, which he doth acknowledge came cheefely by
meanes of the coming of this ship with his Maties. letters of England.

Mr. Adams is of the opynion that, yf eaver the northeast or northwest
passages be fownd out, it must be from these partes, and offreth his
best services therein, the Emperour promisinge his best fortherance
with men or letters of recomendacions to all prinses, and hath
entrance allready into an iland called Yedzo, which is thought to be
rather som parte of the continent of Tartaria. Mr. Adams hath drawne
out the plot of Japan, with parte of that iland and Corea and other
bordering places, and sendeth it to your Worships per this conveance.

Yt is certen that the Hollanders had taken this discovery in hand         259
before now, but that they have soe many irons in the fyre allready
with their wars in the Molucas against the Spaniardes.

I am sory that I canot instantly write your Worships of much benefitt
to be made in these partes; yet I see both the Spaniard, Portingale,
and Duche look out very sharplie about matters of trade. And, yf they
doe good, I hope in tyme we shall doe the lyke, in havinge care and
usinge dilligence, for out of dowbte heare is greate store of silver
in these partes, and, could we gett any greate quantety of broad cloth
to vent, it wold prove a greate matter, allthough at low rates; but as
yet they are soe adicted to silks, that they doe not enter into
consideration of the benefitt of wearinge cloth. But tyme may altar
their myndes, and in the meane tyme we must seeke out other matters
benefitiall, as I have formerly said other men doe; and, for my owne
part, soe long as I stay in these partes (or else where) in your
Worps. service, I will use my best endevour.

                  *     *     *     *     *     *

  At Firando in Japan, the 30th November, 1613.
       Your Worps. duringe lyfe at comand,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [150] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. i, no. 121.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD COCKS TO RICHARD WICKHAM.[151]

                       January the       , 1613[4], Firando in Japan.


Mr. Wickham,--It being generally agreed upon (with your owne consent)
that yow make a voyage for Edow, Sherongo, and those partes of Japan,
with such a cargezon of goods and merchandiz as I should think
fyttinge, beinge assisted with Capt. Adams, for the better dispaching
your busynes with the Emperour, with whome yow know he hath good          260
entrance and no other employments for hym at present; yet, those
matters of the Emperour being past, I pray yow detayne hym not theare,
but will hym to make as much speede as he can back for Firando, where
there will be necessary use of hym.

And being arived in those partes, my opynion is that yow take up your
lodginge in the best merchantes howse in the towne, where yow may have
a gadonge fyrefree, to prevent the danger therof, which is not
unknowne unto yow this cuntrey is much subject unto. And to live under
the roofe of a naturall Japan is better then to be in the howse of any
stranger, be he Duch, Spaniard, Portingall, or of any other nation
whatsoever. And the better mans howse yow lye at, the more creditt it
will be for yow, and the more securetie yow will live in what occation
soeaver happen. I my selfe speake this per experience, as havinge made
proofe thereof. And have an espetiall care not to trust any man with
the Companies goods without makinge ready payment, for I am informed
these cuntrey people are not to be trusted, nether will any marchant
of accompt seeke to bye upon creddit. And for others, they are to be
refused.

And in my opynion it will be your best course to make choise of som
one man in those partes, to assiste yow in makinge choise and
receavinge of your moneyes, a thinge much to be regarded in these
partes per meanes of the greate deceate is used therein. And no dowbt
yow may procure such a one for a small matter. And make much of
frends, when yow have them, and use these cuntrey people kyndly both
in word and deede, for fayre wordes will doe much and as soone are
spoaken as fowle, and allwais good will com thereof; for these cuntrey
people are not to be used nether with bad wordes nor blowes, no not
soe much as servantes entertayned for necessary uses; but rather put
them away, yf they be not to your lykinge, and make choise of others.

And to use any speeches to perswade yow from gamnynge I thinke it is      261
needlese; for I hold yow no gamster. Yet, notwithstandinge, the
admonition of a frend is not to be rejected. And, to say the truth,
many inconvenyences happen and fall out per meanes of gamnynge,
although it be but to passe away the tyme for trifles; and therefore
it is not amisse to forsweare gamnynge.

Yt is good to use both Duche, Spaniardes, and Portingalls kyndly, as
also all other strangers; and learne from them what yow can, but make
them not partakers of your secretes or pretenses.

And for sales or dispach of your comodeties, I know yow will use your
best endevour for our employers benefits; and therefore I will sett
yow no stynted rate or price, but wishe yow to sell away as tyme shall
serve at all prises, to turne all into ready money, before any other
shipinge com out of England, that it may not be said we lye still and
doe nothinge but eate and drink without takinge care for any thinge. I
hope yow will not let the Duch goe beyonde yow in this poynt.

Yow know that as yet we have not sould our English cloth under eight
_taies_ the English yard, and cloth of Cambaia under fowre for one
profitt; but stand yow not upon that matter, but sell away both the
one and other as yow can, as also gunpolder, allthough it be under
twentie _taies_ the barell, which is loe price. Yet yow must consider
it is a dangerouse comodetie to be kept, and therfore make dispach.
Once use your best endevour both for that and the rest, as afforsaid,
etc.

And for the two parcelles of comodeties left in the custody of
Andreas, alias Gendoque Dono, of Uringo, and Quedoquea Stibio Dono,
att Edow and Shrongo, yow are to take acco. of it beinge parte of your
cargezon.

And yf Tome Same, the yonge Kynge of Firando, com unto yow with a note
or remembrance of my hand, to lend hym one thousand _tais_ or more, as
Capt. Adams will advize yow, I pray yow take in my note and let hym       262
have the money, in gevinge yow a bill of his hand to repay it me heare
againe in Firando at demand; which Capt. Adams tells me I need not to
stand in dowbt of, for that the Duch have doone the lyke heretofore
and have receaved good payment. But this must be doone when yow have
receaved money of the Emperour.

And, havinge any overplus of that money lyinge by yow or that is
receaved for any other comodetie, use your best endevour to send it to
me per first sure conveance (which I think will be per Capt. Adams),
that it may not be dead, but be emploied to the Companies use as
occation shall be offred.

And for your dyet or such as shall be with yow, I will not prescribe
yow any rate, because I am unaccoynted with the place; but leave that
to your owne discretion, not dowbtinge but yow will use frugallitie,
etc.

And because yow are to goe overland from Osekey to Shrongo in company
of Capt. Adams about the Emperours busynes, and that it is fytt som
one of trust goe in the bark with the rest of the goods per sea for
that place, I have thought good to send Jno. Phebie with it, a man
well knowne to Capt. Adams, whome yow may entertayne theare as the
Companies servant under yow, yf yow fynde hym capeable or that it be
fytinge.

And forget not to write me per all conveances what yow doe, and learne
out what yow can tuchinge trade into any place we yet know not of.
And, God willing, yow shall not want to heare from me soe often as I
fynd fit conveance. And it is good yow write contynewally to Mr. Eaton
for Osekey, as I have willed hym to doe the lyke to yow; for soe may
we from tyme to tyme understand of each others proceadings, and I be
ready to supplie your wantes with such comodeties as lye by me, yf in
case yow can sell them yow have theare.

And for a _jurebasso_, yf he which promised yow com from Langasaque,      263
yow shall have hym with yow, otherwais yow must get one at Edow or
Shrongo; and in the meane tyme Capt. Adams hath promised me that
Andreas shall helpe yow, and tells me that yow canot want to fynd one
there to your content.

I know not what else to advize yow of for present, but, yf any thinge
com to my remembrance heareafter, yow shall understand thereof per
first. And soe the Lord send yow a prosperouse voyage and safely to
retorne. Amen.

                        Your lovinge frend,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

Mr. Wickham,--I pray yow have a due care to geve Capt. Adams content:
which yow may easelie doe, yf yow use hym with kynde speeches and fall
not into termes with hym upon any argument. I am perswaded I could
live with hym 7 yeares before any exstraordenary speeches should
happen betwixt us. And the necessary use we have of hym is as well
knowne to yow as me. I hope a word will suffice for that matter.

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [151] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. i, no. 127.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD COCKS TO RICHARD WICKHAM.[152]

                              Firando in Japan, the 1th Aprill, 1614.


Mr. Wickham,--By George the Portingall (whoe departed from hence the
9th ultimo) I wrot yow severall letters, advisinge for the present;
since which time I have recd. 2 letters from Mr. Eaton of the 1th and
13th ultimo, wherin he hath adviseth me he hath sould all his white
baftas at sixteene _mas_ the peece, and certen mattes broad cloth
at fyfteene _taies_ the matt. I wish all the rest were gon at
same or lyke rate, both that I have here and others else where. He
sayeth that som of his comodeties they will not look at, namely,          264
selas, blew byrams, and candequis maweey. Once doe what yow can to
sell away, allthough somthinge under cento per cento, for it is better
to have money by us then comodeties, whatsoever shall happen; for here
are many reportes geven out of trubles lyke to ensue in Japan. But
kepe that to your selfe, and learne out what yow can and advize me
thereof per first sure conveance.

I make acco. Capt. Adams will be com away before this com to your
handes, otherwaies geve hym counsell to take heed of one Pedro Guzano,
a papist Christian, whoe is his hoste at Miaco; for a lyinge fryre (or
Jesuist) tould Mr. Peacock at Langasaque that Capt. Adams was dead in
the howse of the said Guzano, which now I know is a lye per letters I
receved from Mr. Eaton, for the said fryre rep[orted] he was dead
before the date thereof. Once I wold wish Capt. Adams to looke to hym
selfe, for these villanose papisticall rable at Langasaque doe geve it
out behinde his back that he is a Lutrano and one that they make
accompt hath incensed the Emperoure against them. I wish Capt. Adams
at his being here to looke to hym selfe and take heed of them. And soe
would I wish yow to do the lyke.

Mr. Peacock departed from Langasaque towardes Cochinchina the 18th
ultimo, as he advized me in a letter of that date, written from abord
the jonke he goeth in called the _Roquan_. We have had much
northerly windes since their departure, soe I dowbt not but they will
have a spedie passage, which God grant them with a prosperouse voyage.

Upon som occation I have noted that yow may esteeme I love yow not, or
that I beare som secret grudge against yow, which here I doe protest
(before God) I doe not, but rather doe esteeme much better of yow
since your cominge hether then I did before. And soe shall yow find by
proofe, yf it lye in my power to do yow good; for I regard not, but
rather have quite put out of my memory, any wordes which have passed
betwixt us hereto[fore].

I wish yow could make dispache of your busynese to be here ag[ainst]      265
the Syam voyage, and then shall yow see what I will doe. And tru[lye]
I wold not wish yow to stay there upon small occations, but rather to
leave them with your host or some other good frend that is assured.
And in the meane tyme sell away what yow can; stand not upon price,
but turne what yow can into money and bringe it alonge with yow. I can
say no more nor geve yow no larger comition then I have doone. And
soe, with my hartie comendacons to your selfe, Sr. Andrea, and the
rest of our accoyntance, I comyt yow to God, restinge allwais your
lovinge frend,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To his lovinge frend, Mr. Richard Wickham,
    deliver in Edow, Shrongo, or
    else where. Per way of Osekey, inclozed
    to Mr. Eaton.

     [152] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. ii, no. 138.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD COCKS TO RICHARD WICKHAM.[153]

                             Firando in Japan, the 12th of May, 1614.


Mr. Wickham,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Ed. Sayer arived heare yisternight from Faccatay, and brought me such
money he had receaved at Tushma, which God knoweth is but littell, he
not havinge sould one yard of English cloth nether all his pepper. He
left John Japan with his host at Faccatay, to see to the busynes in
his abcense. And this mornynge I have sent hym back againe, with order
that yf he see no hope of dispache of his comodeties within 8 or 10
daies, that then he shall retorne for Firando with the rest of his
cargezon.

I hope the Emperour have taken the ordinance, poulder, and such other
comodeties as were sent for hym. Only Capt. Adames hath writ me he
refused most parte of the broad cloth was sent, in respeck it was
moutheaten.

Mr. Nealson hath hym comended unto yow. He and I are soe busye about      266
our building that we have small pleasure, havinge above 100 men daylie
at worke; but I hope it will not last longe. On Sunday night last our
kitchin was set on fire, and soe burned our new gates and gate howse;
but was sowne quenched, God be praised for it. The lose will not be
above 8 or 10 _taies_. I daylie expect Capt. Adames to look out
about a jonck. Newes we have non but that many souldiers are sent out
of Firando, and, as it is said, goe for Arima, but for what intent I
know not.

George the Portingale retorned for Firando the 4th currant. His wife
was brought to bead of a boye the night before he came. Well fall (or
fare), an ould knocker. And soe, with harty comendacons to your selfe
with the rest of our frendes, I remeane

                        Your lovinge frend,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To his lovinge frend, Mr. Ric. Wickham,
    English merchantt, deliver in Edo or
    else where. Per Sr. Duzak Skidoyemon
    Dono.

     [153] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. ii, no. 143.

                        -------------------


                RICHARD COCKS TO WILLIAM ADAMS.[154]

                             Firando in Japan, the 5th of June, 1614.


Capt. Adames,--My last unto yow was of the 12th ultimo, sent per Duzak
Skidoyemon Dono, Yasimon Donos brother in law; since which tyme your
letter, dated in Edo the 27th of Aprill, came to my handes in Firando
the 27th of May followinge.

I was right glad to heare of your good health, but sory to understand
of the longe taryinge of our goods. I pray God that the necklegence of
that dreamynge fello Jno. Phebe be not the occation. Once it is a
greate hinderance to the Company our broad cloth was not vented this      267
winter, soe many caveleros beinge at Court could not have wanted to
have carid all away. And I am afeard that Capt. Browers cloth he sent
hence the last of Aprill will com to serve the market at Edo before
ours; which yf it soe fall out, yow may easely gese what a skandall it
will be unto us, ours departinge hence soe many monethes before it. I
wold to God ours had gon overland all with yow and Mr. Wickham; but,
for me, I had no insight into tymes and seasons. I am enformed that
Toba, the place wheare our goods have layne windbownd soe longe, is
within 2 or 3 dayes jorney of Edo or Shrongo per land. I marvell Mr.
Wickham had not put yow in mynd to have convayed our goods overland at
first _costa que costa_; but now it is to late, I dowbt to our
everlastinge skandall; for yf we stay 7 yeares more in Japan, we shall
neaver have the lyke tyme to have vented our cloth as at this generall
assembly of the nobilletie.

Ould Foyne Same is very sick. It is thought he will not escape it, for
the phisitions have geven hym over. He tould me it was the Emperours
mynd that our cullers (or flagg) should be taken downe, because it had
a crose in it; and to this day it was not set up againe.

I perceave per Mr. Wickhams letter that Tome Same and Oyen Dono are
very ernest to have money before we can receave it, and that in place
of one thowsand _taies_ I promised to lend them they demand two
thowsand. In deed I said I was content to let them have more, yf we
could spare it; but I thinke we canot, and therfore they must pardon
us. God grant they will be as forward to repay it when it shall be
demanded.

I have byn much tormented with an agew, which, after, turned into
extreame ache in my boanes in all partes of my body, soe that I had
thought I should have lost the use of my lymbs and was become a very
crippell. But I praise God it is now somthinge aswaged, and I meane
(God willinge) 4 or 5 daies hence to goe to the hot bathes at Yshew,      268
an iland of Nobisanas, whither Sr. Yasimon Dono will accompany me. Our
howse is now in a good forwardnes, but hath cost caro. And soe, in
hast, I rest

                      Your ever lovinge frend,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the worll. his frend, Capt. Willm.
    Adames, deliver in Edo or else wheare.

     [154] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. ii, no. 147.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD COCKS TO RICHARD WICKHAM.[155]

                               Firando in Japan, 1614, July the 25th.


Mr. Wickham,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

With greefe of mynd I write unto yow of the ill hap and death of our
frend Mr. Tempest Peacock in Cochinchina, where he arived in saffetie,
as the Duch did the lyke, and sould their goods to the kinge, whoe
gave order they should com to his cittie of Miaco to receave payment,
but forestald them and sett upon them in their retorne and kild all
that was in company, both Duch, English, and Japans their followers.
But, as it is reported, Walter Carwarden was left abord the jonck and
soe escaped; yet serche was made there for hym, and whether he be
alive or dead, God He knoweth, or what parte of our comodetie was left
abord the jonk, for out of dowbt Walter was not left there for
nothing. And amongst the rest they had a thousand _pezos_ in
rialls of 8, which I am assured was not ashore. Their cargezon did
amount to above seaven hundred twentie and eight pownd str., as it
cost first peny. It is thought that the Kynge of Cochinchina did this
in revenge of som injuries offered hym per the Duch certen yeares
past. God grant Walter may escape, and then I dowbt not but a good
parte of our goodes will be retorned.

Also there is reportes that Capt. Chongros jonck is cast away in          269
retornyng. And our host at Langasaque is retorned from the Phillipinas
and bringeth newes that aboove 20 seale of Hollanders are com thether
from the Moloucas, amongst whome are 2 or 3 saile of English ships;
but I canot beleeve that, except it be the _Pearle_ or such lyke.
Yf this be true, out of dowbt it goeth ill with the Spaniardes in the
Molucas. In my next I will advize yow more hereof.

At present we are about preparing a ship or jonck to make a voyage for
Syam. And seeinge it hath pleased God to take away Mr. Peacock, of
necessitie yow or my cuntreman Mr. Eaton must be emploied about that
voyage. And the shipp will be ready to departe som 4 monethes hence.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Cornelius, Capt. Browers kinsman, is slaine with their _jurebasso_;
but Adrian, beinge sent to an other place, is thought to be escaped. I
shall not be quiet till I heare of Walter. God grant he be escaped.
And soe I rest allwayes

                        Your lovinge frend,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To his lovinge frend, Mr. Richard Wickham,
    merchantt, deliver in Edo. Per
    John Phebe.

     [155] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. ii, no. 155.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[156]

                           Firando in Japan, the 25th November, 1614.


Right worshipfull,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Mr. Wm. Adames hath paid me twentie pownd str. your Wor. lent his wife
in England. He [paid] it presently after the _Clove_ was gon. I
find the man tractable and willing to doe your Wor. the best service
he may, and hath taken greate paines about the reparing our jonck         270
called the _Sea Adventure_, otherwaies she wold not have byn ready to
have made the Syam voyage this yeare. He ha[th a] great desire to find
out the norther passage for England from hence, and thinketh it an
easie matter to be donne in respect the Emperour of this place offreth
his assistance. Your Wor. shall find me as willing as any man it shall
please yow to employ in these partes to second hym.

The Emperour of Japan hath banished all Jesuistes, pristes, friers,
and nuns out of all his domynions, som being gon for the Phillippinas
and the rest for Amacou in China. Yt is thought wars will ensue in
Japan betwixt the Emperour and Fidaia Same, sonne to Ticus Same, the
deceased Emperour.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

We cannot per any meanes get trade as yet from Tushma into Corea,
nether have them of Tushma any other privelege but to enter into one
littell towne (or fortresse), and in paine of death not to goe without
the walles thereof to the landward; and yet the King of Tushma is no
subject to the Emperour of Japan. I am geven to understand that up in
the cuntrey of Corea they have greate citties and betwixt that and the
sea mightie boggs, soe that no man can travell on horseback nor very
hardlie on foote. But, for remedie against that, they have invented
greate waggons or carts which goe upon broad flat whiles under seale,
as shipps doe; soe that, observing monsons, they transport their
goodes to and fro in thease sealing waggons. They have damasks,
sattens, taffetes, and other silke stuffs made theare as well as in
China. It is said that Ticus Same, otherwaies called Quabicondono (the
deceased Emperour), did pretend to have convayed a greate armie in
thease sealing waggons, to have assealed the Emperour of China on a
sudden in his greate cittie of Paquin, where he is ordenarely
rezident; but he was prevented by a Corean noble man whoe poisoned        271
hym selfe to poison the Emperour and other greate men of Japan; which
is the occation that the Japans have lost all that which som 22 yeares
past they had gotten pocession of in Corea, etc.

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [156] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. ii, no. 189.

                        -------------------


       RALPH COPPINDALL TO ROBERT LARKIN AND ADAM DENTON.[157]

                          Firando in Japan, le 5th of December, 1615.


Loveing frendes,--Wishing your welfare, etc. After a tedious passage
and almost out of hope to obtaine my appointed porte (by reason of the
latenes of the monsoone), it pleased God (praysed be His name) to
bringe me, with men, shipp, and goodes, in safety unto Firando upon
the 4th September past, where I found Captaine Adames returned and his
juncke in trimminge a new. He putt not into China, as was reported,
but into the iland called Leque Grande, where he was indifferentlie
entreated, but could not be suffered to repayre his junck as he
desired, beinge forced onelie to stay for the monsone to bringe him
backe againe hither.

Upon the 11th September I departed from hence towardes the Emperours
court with a present (which every shipp or juncke that cometh hither
must of force performe), which with charges much surmounteth an
indifferent custome, espetially when a shipp cometh with a small
capitall, and sales soe base and slacke that nothinge is here to be
expected but losse, except a trade be procured into China, the raw
silkes of which cuntrey are alwaies here reddy mony and reasonable
profitt. Ether, I say, we must procure a peaceable trade in China, or
elles, as the Hollanders doe, to trade with them perforce. And, yf wee
sett foote in the Moluccoes, this place will be a fitt storehouse from
whence we may alwaies have men, munition, and victualles good store
and at reasonable rates; for which purpose principally the Hollanders     272
doe mentaine this factory.

The Portingalles are quite out of favour with the Emperor. They
attended 40 daies at the Emperors court to deliver theire present,
which at last was recd., but none of them admitted to his presence. It
is thought that they will com noe more hither with any greate shippes
from Amacon.

Certaine Jesuites came out of Nova Espania in embassage unto the
Emperor, with a letter and a present from the King of Spaine, which,
after a moneth or 6 weekes attendance, the Emperor recd., but none of
the embassadors admitted to his presence. All the answer to their
embassage was, to gett them foorth of this cuntry with speede, upon
paine of his displeasure.

His cuntry is now in peace, for that the old Emperor hath made an
absolute conquest, haveinge driven the young king quite out of this
cuntry and made away most of his principall partakers.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Capt. Cock is of opinion that the ginghams, both white and browne,
which yow sent will prove a good commodity in the Kinge of Shashma his
cuntry, who is a kinge of certaine of the most westermost ilandes of
Japon, a man of greate power and hath conquered the ilandes called the
Leques, which not long since weare under the governement of China.
Leque Grande yeeldeth greate store of amber greece of the best sorte,
and will vent 1,000 or 15,000 (_sic_) ps. of course cloth, as
dutties and such like, per annum. At my being at the Emperor, I
procured his letters unto the King of Shashma, to graunt us as free
liberties of trade in the Leques and all other his dominions as we had
in any other parte of Japon; and in February Mr. Richard Wickham is to
goe thither, and (priviledges obtained accordinge to the Emperors
order) to remaine there.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Thus for present I committ yow and your affaires unto the protection      273
of the Almighty.

                  Your loveinge frend to commaund,
                                                    RAPHE COPPINDALL.

Yow are to note that the people of this cuntry doe not buy our sortes
of India cloth soe much for necessity as for the new and strange
fashions and painteinges thereof, being a people desireinge change;
for they have greate store of silkes and linnen stuffes made here
better and cheaper then we can afford our India cloth. Soe that we
must strive to procure strange sortes of cloth with strange
painteinges every yeare; but such cloth as hath any redd painteinge
will not sell here. The Hollanders sell English broade cloth for 7 and
8 _tayes_ the _tattamy_, which is 2-1/3 yardes at the leaste. The
devell hawle some of them for theire paines.

  To his very loveinge frendes, Mr. Robert
    Larkin and Mr. Adam Denton, English
    merchantes, deliver in Patania.
    Per Capt. Adams, per way of Syam,
    whom God preserve.

     [157] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. iii, no. 317.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD COCKS TO [JOHN GOURNEY].[158]

                          Firando in Japon, le 6th of December, 1615.


Worshipfull,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

As I advised in my last the Emperor did very gratiously accept of the
present Capt. Coppendall carid up unto hym, as Capt. Adames can better
enforme yow whoe was an eye witnesse, the Emperour offring to geve us
anything that might be for the benefit or good of our nation,
esteeming us above all other Christian nations whatsoever.

And, as I advised yow, the Hollanders took a Portingale junck on          274
this cost and brought her into Firando. And the Emperour hath
alowed it for good prize, both men and goods, and that either we or
they may take them or Spaniardes at sea and make good purchesse
thereof, except they have the Emperours passe.

Also yow may understand how a shipp arived at Quanto in Japon this
yeare, which came out of New Spaine and brought good quantety of broad
cloth, kersies, perpetuanos, and raz de Millan, which they offer at a
loe rate; but I thinke it is the last that ever will be brought from
thence, for it is said the Spaniardes made proclemation with 8 drums
at Aguapulca and other partes that, upon payne of death, their should
neaver any more Japons com nor trade into New Spayne, and that both
they and all other strangers of what nation soever should forthwith
avoid out of all partes of New Spaine. But in requitall hereof the
Emperour of Japon hath made proclemation, in payne of death, that
neaver hereafter any Japon shall trade or goe into New Spaine, and
comanded the fryres or padres which came in this shipp should avoid
out of his dominions; for the truth is, he is noe frend nether to
Spaniardes nor Portingalles.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

                    Your loving frend at comand,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [158] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. iii, no. 319.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[159]

                        Firando in Japon, the 25th February, 1615[6].


Right worshipfull,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I know not whether it be come to your W[orp. to understand the]
conclusion of these greate wars in Japon [wherin Fidaia] Samme, the
son of Ticus Samme, lost [his life, with the] slaughter of above          275
100,000 men which took his [parte. Some] report he was burned in his
castell, it being fired; others think he escaped and is in Shashma or
the Liqueas. His mother cut her owne belly, and his littell childe was
executed by comand from the Emperour, as also all others were the lyke
which were knowne to take parte with hym. And Osakay and Sackay, two
greate citties, burned to the grownd, not soe much as one howse being
saved; your Worps. loosing goodes which were burned to the vallu of
155 _ta._ 5 _ma._ 8 _condr._, as apeareth per acco. sent to Capt. Jno.
Jourden, your Wor. agent at Bantam.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

[And may it plea]se your Worps. to understand that the last yeare [it
was agreed for a certe]n Italion marrener to goe in our junck for Syam
[whose name is] Damian Marina, and an other Castalliano called Jno.
[de Lievana] went with hym. Which coming to the knowledg of the
Portingales and Spaniardes at Langasaque, that they had served the
English, they laid handes on them and carid them presoners abord the
great shipp of Amacan. The which being made knowen unto me, I wrot a
letter to the capitan major of the ship, willing hym to set them at
liberty, for that they were not under his comand nor jurisdiction, but
under the English; and to the lyke effect I wrot an other letter to
Gonrocq Dono, cheefe governor at Langasaque for the Emperour; but had
a scornfull answer from the Portingale, and nothing but words from the
Japon. Whereupon I got a letter testimoniall from the King of Firando
to the Emperour, how these 2 men were entertayned into service of the
English; and Mr. Wm. Adams being above with Capt. Ralph Coppendalle to
carry a [present to] the Emperour, gave hym to understand of this
matter, [and he gave] his command forthwith that the 2 men should be
[set at liberty] and all their goodes restored to them. Which was
[accordingly accomp]lished to the greate harts greefe both of [the        276
Spaniardes and Port]ingale, they haveing condemned them both [to
death] and sent pristes to confesse them and exhibited [articles]
against them to Gonrock Dono, as against traitors [to their owne]
cuntry and frendes to the English and Hollanders their enemies. Which
processe the capt. major deliverd both in Japons and Portugese with
his ferme at it; but that in Portugese Gonrocq Dono sent to the King
of Firando, and he gave it unto me, which here inclozed I send unto
your Wor., together with his letter written to me, in which is
manifested that they hould both English and Duch for their enemies.

But that which vexeth them the most is that the Hollanders tooke a
Portingale junck on the cost of Japon laden with ebony wood, the
greatest parte, with tynne and serten bars of gould and much conservs.
Which junck with all that was in it, men and all, the Emperour aloweth
for good prize; and is [to] be thought that Mr. Wm. Adames was a
cheefe occation to move the Emperour thereunto, he first asking Mr.
Adames wherefore [there was] such hatred betwixt the Spaniardes and
Hollanders, for [that it w]as tould hym their princese and governors
were [frendes in all] other partes of the world, and that it seemed
strange [to hym that they] should be enemies heare. Unto which Mr.
Adames answerd that it was true they [had been] frendes of late yeares
per meanes of the Kinge [of England] and other potentates; but yet,
notwithstanding, [the Kinge of] Spaine did think hym selfe to have
more right [in these] partes of the world then any other Christian
prince, by [reason] of the footing he had gotten in the Phillippinas
and in other partes of the Indies, and therefor per force ment to
keepe all other nations from trading into these partes. Unto which the
Emperour replied and said, the Spaniard had no reason, and therefore,
seeing it was a differance or dispute amongst us which were all
strangers, he would not make nor meddell in the matter, but leave         277
it to their princes to decide at home. "But," said he, "what is the
occation they take men as well as goods?" "Because (said Mr. Adames)
the Spaniardes take the Hollanders and have 150 or 200 of them
presoners in the Phillipi[nas, for] which occation the Hollanders doe
use the lyke [towards] their people, man for man and goodes for
goodes." [Unto which] the Emperour answerd that they had [reason].

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

[Mr. Adames tould me that the] Emperour gave hym councell not [to
seale in Japon] joncks on noe voyage, but rather stay in [Japon, and
that] yf the stipend he had geven hym were not [enough] he would geve
hym more. But he answerd his [word was] passed, and therefore, yf he
performed not his w[ord, it would] be a dishonor unto hym. Yet truly,
at his retorne to Firando, I offred to have quit hym of his promis and
to have sent hym to Edo to be neare the Emperour upon all occations.
Yet would he not be perswaded thereunto. But the Emperour esteemeth
hym much, and he may goe and speake with hym at all tymes, when kyngs
and princes are kept out.

Mr. Adames tould me his tyme of serveing your Wor. 2 yeares at one
hundred powndes or 400 _tais_ per anno. was out before he went
towardes Syam; yet would he receave no pay till his retorne, willing
me to certifie your Wor. that he thought 100_l._ very littell,
and would be loth to engage hym selfe any more at that rate, [and]
willed me to desyre your Wor. to let his wife have [30 or 40 powndes]
str. to supplie her wantes of her selfe and childe, y[f there were
any] need, and he would see it repaid heare againe.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

[And may it pleas]e your Wor. to understand that the Emperour [hath
commanded] all the _tonos_ (or kinges) of Japon to com to his
[court and] bring their wives (or queenes) with them, for [to remaine
the]are the space of 7 yeares. He will no [char]ges of sonns,             278
doughters, or kynred, but they them selves and their queenes with
them, and each one to keepe howse by hym selfe and have a servant of
the Emperour allwaies neare them to understand what passeth. He
aledgeth it is for their goods he doth it, to keepe Japon in quiet,
which otherwais would still be in broyles. Soe now all the kinges and
queenes of Japon are bound prentis to the Emperour for 7 yeares, and
this _Tono_ of Firando departed from hence towardes the court 12 daies
past, he being a bachelar, the Emperour haveing promised hym to geve
hym his brothers doughter to wife.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

               Your Worshipps most humble at command,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [159] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. iii, no. 342.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD WICKHAM TO RICHARD COCKS.[160]

                            (_Extract._)

                                            Meaco, le 22th May, 1616.


Many report that the Emperor is dead, but the report from most of
credit saye he is recovered and in resonabel good health. He hath
bestowed great presents upon the chefe nobylity whome he hath
despatched very honorably for theyr contery. Shimash Dono came
yesterday to Fuxame, and will be imbarked within this 4 daies at
furdest from Osacay. Frushma Tayo Dono came to Meaco 4 dayes since,
having leave to goe for his contery after 5 yeares attendance at the
court. He is much honored heare in these parts. Shongo Sama is
departed from Serongaue 23 dayes since for Eado, and it is said that
he will come and visit his douory in Meaco in June or July next.
During the Emperors sicknes he caused his chefe phesition to be cut in
peces for telling him, being asked by the Emperor why he could not        279
soner cure him, that in regard he was an ould man his medesen could
not worke so efectualy upon his body as apon a yong man. Wheareupon
without saying any more to him commanded Cogioodon to cause him to be
bound and cut in peces. Upon the which Ximas Dono sent him his
phesition, the China, who did him much good, as it is reported; which
maketh me thinck that the Emperor is living by reason Ximas Dono his
peopell doe report. You may be sure the China would not kepe any such
secret from his master Ximas Dono, yet nether Ximas Dono nor Tozo Dono
nor any nobel man since the going up hath sene the Emperor, nether of
his Counsell hath any this many dayes bene admited to his presents,
there being none but Cogi Dono, 2 weomen, and 2 phesitions sufered to
com in his sight, which maketh many to suspect that he is dead, as
they saye it is the maner to conceale the death of the Emperor a whole
yeare or more before it be knowne publik.

     [160] India Office. _Miscellaneous Records_, T. c., no. 43.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[161]

                           Firando in Japon, le 1th January, 1616[7].


Right worshipfull,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

May it please your Wors. to understand that, these 2 shipps [the
_Thomas_ and the _Advice_] being arived at Firando in Japon and Mr.
Jno. Baylie being very sick, wherof he shortly after died, it was
generally thought fit that I made a journey to the court of the new
Emperour Shungo Samme, to renew our privelegese (as the Hollanders
ment to do the lyke), in which voyage I was 4 monethes and 5 daies
before I retorned to Firando, and the Hollanders are not yet retorned.
Yet the 5th day after I arived at court our present was deliverd, and
had audience with many favorable wordes, but could not get my dispach
in above a month after; so that once I thought we should have lost        280
all our privelegese, for the Councell sent unto us I think above
twenty tymes to know whether the English nation were Christians or no.
I answerd we were, and that they knew that before by our Kinges
Maties. letter sent to the Emperour his father (and hym selfe),
wherein it apeared he was defender of the Christian faith. "But", said
they, "are not the Jesuists and fryres Christians two?" Unto which I
answerd they were, but not such as we were, for that all Jesuists and
fryres were banished out of England before I was borne, the English
nation not houlding with the pope nor his doctryne, whose followers
these padres (as they cald them) weare. Yt is strang to see how often
they sent to me about this matter, and in the end gave us waynyng that
we did not comunecate, confesse, nor baptiz with them, for then they
should hold us to be all of one sect. Unto which I replied that their
Honours needed not to stand in dowbt of any such matter, for that was
not the custom of our nation.

Soe, in the end, they gave me our new privelegese with the Emperours
ferme, telling me they were conformable to the former. So herewith I
departed, and, being 2 daies journey on my way, met an expres from Mr.
Wickham, wherin he wrot me from Miaco that the justice (per the
Emperours comand) had geven order that all strangers should be sent
downe to Firando or Langasaque, and forthwith departe and carry all
their merchandiz with them and not stay to sell any, so that he was
forced to keepe within howse, and our hostes durst sell nothing. Which
news from Mr. Wickham seemed very strang unto me. Whereupon I sought
one to read over our privelegise, which with much a do at last I fownd
a _boz_ (or pagon prist) which did it, and was that we were
restrayned to have our shiping to goe to no other place in Japon but
Firando, and there to make sales. Whereupon I retorned back againe to
the court, where I staid 18 or 20 daies more, still suing and puting      281
up suplecations to have our privelegese enlarged as before, aledging
that yf it were not soe, that my soveraigne lord King James would
think it to be our misbehaviours that cauced our privelegese to be
taken from us, they having so lately before byn geven us by his Matis.
father of famous memory, and that it stood me upon as much as my life
was worth to get it amended, otherwais I knew not how to shew my face
in England. Yet, for all this, I could get nothing but wordes.
Whereupon I desyred to have the ould privelegese retorned and to
render back the new, with condition they would geve us 3 yeares
respite to write into England and have answer whether our Kinges
Matie. would be content our privelegese should be so shortned or no.
Yet they would not grant me that. And then I desird we might have
leave to sell such merchandiz as we had now at Miaco, Osakay, Sackay,
and Edo; otherwais I knew not what to do, in respect Firando was but a
fysher towne, haveing no marchantes dwelling in it, and that it was
tyme now to send back our shipps and junckes, and nothing yet sould.
Yet this I could not have granted nether. So that with much a doe in
the end they gave me leave, as I past, to sell my goodes to any one
would presently buy it, or else leave it to be sould with any Japon I
thought good to trust with it. Which restrant hath much hindered our
sales and put me to my shiftes, the rather for that the order of Japon
is that no stranger may sell any thing at arivall of their shipps till
it be knowne what the Emperour will take; so that it is allwais above
a month or 6 wickes before a post can run to and fro to have lycence.

And at my coming away Oyen Dono and Codsquin Dono, the Emperours
secretarys, tould me that they were sory they could not remedy this
matter of our privelegese at present, the reason being for that an
Emperours edict per act of parliament being soe lately set out could
not so sowne be recalled without scandalle, but the next yeare, yf        282
I renewed my sute, my demandes being so substantiated, they did verely
think it might be amended, in respect Firando was well knowne to be
but a fisher towne. So that I aledged the Emperour might as well take
away all our privelegese and banish us out of Japon as to shut us up
in such a corner as Firando, where no marchantes dwell. But I hope the
next yeare, when Generall Keeling cometh, it may be amended; otherwais
I feare me our Japon trade will not be worth the looking after.

And it is to be noted that at my retorne to Miaco, haveing donne such
busynes as I had theare, I would have left Richard Hudson, a boy, your
Wor. servant, to have learnd to write the Japans; but might not be
suffered to doe it, the Emperour haveing geven order to the contrary.
Soe we withdrew all our factors from Edo, Miaco, Osakay, and Sackay to
Firando.

The fathers which came in the shipp from Aguapulca brought a present
from the King of Spaine to the Emperour; but, after he had kept it
halfe a yeare, he retorned it back, not reserving any thing, but bad
them be gon.

And I had allmost forgotten to adviz your Wors. of a Spaniard, which
was at the Emperours court at Edo when I was theare. He went out of a
ship of theirs from Xaxma, where 2 greate shipps of theirs arived out
of New Spaine, bound, as they said, for the Phillippinas, but driven
into that place per contrary wynd, both shipps being full of
souldiers, with greate store of treasure, as it is said, above 5
millions of _pezos_. Soe they sent this man to kis the Emperours
hand; but he never might be suffered to com in his sight, allthough he
staid theare above a month; which vexed hym to see we had axcesse to
the Emperour and he could not. So that he gave it out that our shipps
and the Hollanders which were at Firando had taken and robbed all the
China juncks, which was the occation that very few or non came into       283
Japon this yeare. And som greate men in the court did not want to aske
me the question whether it were true or no, Mr. Wm. Adames being
present. Which we gave them to understand that, concernynge the
Englishe, it was most falce. And withall I enformed the two
secretaries, Oyen Dono and Codsquin Dono, that, yf they lookt out well
about these 2 Spanish shipps arived in Xaxma full of men and treasure,
they would fynd that they were sent of purpose by the King of Spaine,
haveing knowledg of the death of the ould Emperour, thinking som
papisticall tono might rise and rebell and so draw all the papistes to
flock to them and take part, by which meanes they might on a sudden
seaz upon som strong place and keepe it till more succors came, they
not wanting money nor men for thackomplishing such a strattagim. Which
speeches of myne wrought so far that the Emperour sent to stay them,
and, had not the greate shipp cut her cable in the howse so to escape,
she had byn arested, yet with her hast she left som of her men behind;
and the other shipp being of som 300 tons was cast away in a storme
and driven on shore, but all the people saved. So in this sort I crid
quittance with the Spaniardes for geveing out falce reportes of us,
yet since verely thought to be true which I reported of them.

Also may it please your Wors. that, at our being at themperours court,
the amerall of the sea was very ernest with Mr. Wm. Adames to have byn
pilot of a voyage they pretended to the northward to make conquest of
certen ilands, as he said, rich in gould; but Mr. Adames exskewced hym
selfe in that he was in your Wors. service and soe put hym afe. And as
I am enformed, they verely think that our pretence to discover to the
northward is to fynd out som such rich ilandes and not for any
passage. Yet I tould the admerall to the contrary, and tould hym that
my opinion was he might doe better to put it into the Emperours mynd
to make a conquest of the Manillias and drive those small crew of         284
Spaniardes from thence, it being so neare unto Japon; they haveing
conquered the Liqueas allready. He was not unwilling to listen
heareunto, and said he would comunecate the matter to the Emperour.
And out of dowbt yt would be an easy matter for the Emperour to doe
it, yf he take it in hand, and a good occation to set the Japons
heades awork, to put the remembrance of Ticus Samme and his sonne
Fidaia Samme, so lately slaine and disinhereted, out of their minds.

And tuching my former opinion of procuring trade into China, I am
still of the same mynd. And, had it not byn for the greate wars
betwixt the Tartars and them the last yeare, which cauced the Emperour
of China to goe into the northermost partes of his kyngdom to
withstand them, otherwais we had had news of entrance before now. Yet,
notwithstanding, the Chinas which have the matter in hand have sent an
expres about it againe, and caused two letters to be written in China
(as from me) with my ferme at them, with two others in English from me
to same effect, only for fation sake, because they might see my ferme
was all one, the one letter being directed: To the mighty and
powrefull Lord Fiokew, Secretary of Estate to the high and mightie
Prince, the Emperour of China, manifesting that I had geven two
hundred _tais_ to the bearer thereof, his Lo. servant, to buy hym
necessaries in the way, hoping to receve som good news shortly from
his Lo. of our entrance into China, with other complementall wordes,
as the Chinas wisht me put downe. And the other letter was directed:
To the greate and powrefull Lord Ticham Shafno, Councellor of Estate
to the high and mighty Prince, the Emperour of China, also making
relasion of ten greate bars Oban gould, amonting to 550 _tais_
Japon plate, deliverd to the said bearer to carry to hym as a toaken
or small remembrance of my good will, hoping to heare som good news
from hym, as in the other. But both the 10 bars gould and 200
_tais_ silver are sent from the China Capt. to them, yet put downe        285
in my name, as yf it came from me. In fine, these Chinas tell me that
undowbtedly it will take effect, and the sowner yf the Portingales be
sent from Macau this yeare, as they have adviz they shall. But,
howsoever, these men follow the matter hardly, and tell me that the
Emperour of China hath sent espies into all partes where the
Spaniardes, Portingales, Hollanders, and we do trade, in these partes
of the world, only to see our behaveours on towardes an other, as also
how we behave our selves towardes strangers, especially towardes
Chinas. And som have byn in this place and brought by our frendes to
the English howse, where I used them in the best sort I could, as I
have advized to Bantam, Pattania, and Syam to doe the lyke to all
Chinas.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Also may it please your Worships to understand that, since my retorne
from the Japon cort, there came a mestisa Indian to me, which went to
Cochinchina from Japon in the same junck which Mr. Peacock and Walter
Carwarden went in, and sayeth the reportes are falce which are geven
out against Mr. Peacockes host, that he set upon hym in the way to
slay hym and the Duch, but rather that the matter hapned by meare
chance, his said host being in the boate with hym when it was
overthrowne, and escaped hardly ashore with swyming, being taken up
halfe dead and hardly recovered health in a moneth after; and that Mr.
Peacock carid 50 or 60 R. of 8 along with hym in his pocket, which was
the occation of his drownyng, as apeard som dayes after when his body
was fownd per Walter Carwarden (this mestisa accompanying hym) whoe
fownd the said R. 8 in his pocket, and after gave his body buriall.
And that Walter Carwarden staid in Cochinchina above a month after,
before he imbarked hym selfe to retorne for Japon, the monson being
past. So that, Mr. Peacock being dead and Walter Carwarden gon without
going up to the court to receave the monies which the kyng owed for       286
merchandiz bought, that the kyng took occation to write Safian Dono,
governor at Langasaque under the Emperour of Japon, to signefie unto
hym of the death of the one Englishman and departure of the other, so
that, yf an Englishman would com and receve the money he owed, he was
ready to pay it. But the junck which brought that letter for Safian
Dono was cast away, as well as that wherin Water Carwarden came, so
that we never heard news of them.

The boate wherein Mr. Peacock and the Hollanders were in was overset,
or rather steamed, by another bigger boate runing against them on a
sudden in turnyng at a corner, the other coming on a sudden upon them
from behind a point of land, being under seale and haveing the currant
with her; so that they had no meanes to avoid them, but were presently
sunck downe and, the currant being swift, very few were saved, his
host, a Japon, being one.

I did what I could at my being at Edo to have procured the Emperours
letter to the Kyng of Cochinchina in our behalfe, to have had
restetution of such marchandiz he had bought, in respect we lived in
Japon under his protection and that our goodes went in a Japon junck
under his chape or pase; yet, doe what I could, he denid his letter,
saying he would not medell in other mens matters, nether be behoulden
to the King of Cochinchina for it. But now, coming to knowledg of
these matters and seeing Capt. Adames to have bought a junck, going
hym selfe for pilot in her, I have written to Safian Dono to let us
have his letter of favour to the King of Cochinchina, to send som
small adventure with hym. And Edmond Sayer is very desirous to goe
along with Mr. Wm. Adames; but as yet the adventure is not determined
upon. God send it good suckcesse.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I receved a box by the _Adviz_ with a certen roote in it, which came      287
from Cape Bona Speranza; but it proveth here worth nothing, it being
dried that no substance remeaneth in it. Herewithall I send your Wors.
som of it, with an other peece of that which is good and cometh out of
Corea. It is heare worth the wight in silver, but very littell to be
had in comune mens handes, for that all is taken up for the Emperour
by the Kyng of Tushma, whome only hath lycense to trade with the
Coreans, and all the tribute he payeth to the Emperour is of this
rowte. Yt is helde heare for the most pretious thing for phisick that
is in the world, and (as they thinke) is suffitient to put lyfe into
any man, yf he can but draw breath; yet must be used in measure, or
else it is hurtfull.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The China captens which labour to get us entrance into China doe tell
me that your Wors. canot send a more pretiouser thing to present the
Emperour of China withall then a tree of currall, ether white or red.
They say the Portingales of Macau gave a white corrall tree to the
Emperour of China many yeares past, which he doth esteem one of the
ruchest jewells he hath. Also they say that earelings or jewelles to
hang in hattes, that are greate pearls and of an orient culler, are
esteemed much in China. And som very greate looking glasses and fyne
Semian chowters and white baftas are good for presentes, with som guns
well damasked, but not soe hevie as these are which ordenarely are
sent; and som dagges or pistalls, som short and others more longer.

The three peeces currall your Wors. sent for a triall were disposed of
as followeth, viz. 1 branch containing 1 _ta._ 1 _ma._ 5 _co._, and 1
branch containing 9 _ma._ 2 _co._, both geven the Emperour in his
present; 1 branch containing 1 _ta._ 2 _co._, sould for ten _tais_ two
_mas_ plate. But yf much com it will not sell at that rate. The biger
the peces or branches are, and of a red culler well polished, are most
in esteem; for they make buttens or knots of them to hange their          288
purces at.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I know not what else to write, but that my greatest sorrow is I lye in
a place which hitherto hath byn chargable and not benefitiall to your
Wors., by reasons of the presentes contynewally geven, it being the
fation of the contrey, or else there is noe staying for us yf we doe
not as other strangers doe. And were it not for the hope of trade into
China, or for procuring som benefit from Syam, Pattania, and (it may
be) from Cochinchina trade, it were noe staying in Japon. Yet it is
certen here is silver enough, and may be carried out at pleasure; but
then must we bring them comodeties to ther lyking, as the Chinas,
Portingales, and Spaniardes doe, which is raw silke and silke stuffs,
with Syam sapon and skins; and that is allwais ready money, as price
goeth, littell more or lesse.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

And soe I take my leave, commiting your Wors. with your affares to the
holy protection of the Allmighty, resting allwais

                Your Worps. most humble at command,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [161] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. iii, no. 342.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[162]

                       Firando in Japon, le 16th of January, 1616[7].


Right worll. Ser and Sers,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

As tuching the discovery to be made from hence to the northward, to
seeke for passage into England, there was noe mention thereof made in
our former previleges, that the Emperour offered (or promised) to
assist us therein, nether would they now put in any such matter. So
that, to say the truth, yf we goe about to take such a matter in          289
hand, I know not well whether the Japons will assist us or no. Yet
know I nothing to the contrary but they will. The coppie of our
previlegese (as we have them now) I send yow here inclozed, I geting
them translated my selfe by a learned _boz_, haveing two _juribassos_
with Capt. Adames to assist me at doeing thereof.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

                 Your Wors. most humble at command,
                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [162] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. iv, no. 433.

                        -------------------


   _Coppie of the articles (or previleges) granted to the English
          nation by_ SHONGO SAMME, _Emperour of Japon_.[163]


Be yt knowne unto all men that the English nation throughout all
Japon, in what part thereof soever they arive with their shipping,
shall, with all convenyent speed they can, retyre to the towne (and
port) of Firando, there to make sale of their marchandiz, defending
all other places and partes whatsoever in Japon not to receave any of
their goodes nor merchandiz ashore, but at Firando only.

2. But yf it fortune through contrary wyndes (or bad wether) their
shiping arive in any other port in Japon, that they shalbe frendly
used in paying for what they take (or buy), without exacting any
ancoradge, custom, or other extraordenary matters whatsoever.

3. That yf the Emperour needeth any thing their shiping bringeth, that
it shall be reserved for hym in paying the worth therof.

4. That noe man force (or constraine) thenglish to buy nor sell with
them, nether thenglish the like with the Japons, but that both parties
deale the one with the other in frendly sort.

5. That yf any of the English nation chance to die in any part of         290
Japon, that the good, monies, and marchandiz, or whatsoever else is
found to be in his custody at the hower of his death shall be helde to
be or belong to hym (or them) unto whome the capt. or cape merchant of
thenglish nation sayeth it belongeth unto.

6. That yf there be any difference or controvercy (be it of life and
death or otherwais) amongst the English abord their shipps or aland,
yt shall be at the disposing of the capt. or cape merchant to make an
end thereof, without that any other justice in Japon shall tuch them
or meddell in the matter.

7. The conclusion is, to comand all _tonos_ (or kinges),
governors, and other offecers in Japon whatsoever to se the premesies
afforsaid accomplished.

     [163] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. iv, no. 379A.

                        -------------------


      RICHARD COCKS TO WILLIAM NEALSON AND JOHN OSTERWICK.[164]

                        Fushamy in Japon, le 12th of September, 1617.


Loving frendes,--

My last unto yow was of the 10th present from Miaco, advising yow of
my arivall theare. And yistarday we came from thence to this place of
Fushamy, to which place Capt. Adames came to us.

The Coreans have byn royally receaved in all places wheare they came,
by comandment from themperour. And, as we entred into Miaco, they took
us to be Coreans, and therefore in greate hast, as we passed, strawed
the streetes with sand and gravill, multetudes of people thrunging in
to see us.

I stand in greate hope we shall get our priveleges enlarged as before,
and all thinges to content. But I canot write yow the truth thereof
till I know how it will passe. Only this encuradgement I have from        291
Oyen Donos secretary, whoe heareth how matters are lyke to passe. Yf
themperour enlarge our privelegese, I will forthwith send for our
comodetis, as silk, wood, skins, cloth, quicksilver, etc.

The Hollandars setting their Syam lead at 6-1/2, the Emperour hath
refuced it and will not meddell with it, but take all ours. The
Hollandars have made a greate complaint against the _Tono_ of
Firando of their bad usage donne by the mouth of Jno. Yoossen, seting
hym at nought, not soe much as going to vizet hym. And, as it seemeth,
he stood in dowbt we would have don the like; yet, upon good
considerations, I have thought fit to proceead in an other fation, not
dowbting but I shall have better justis at Firando then heretofore.
Keepe all these matters to your selfe, and, when I heare more, I will
adviz yow from tyme to tyme and retorne with as much speed as possibly
I may; and soe in hast comyt yow to God, resting

                         Your loving frend,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

This day we delivered our present to themperour, which was well
accepted of with a cherefull countenance.

Yt is said that to morrow the _dyrie_ ys to geve the title to
themperour which he soe much desyreth.

     [164] British Museum. _Cotton Charter_, iii, 13, f. 14.

                        -------------------


      RICHARD COCKS TO WILLIAM NEALSON AND JOHN OSTERWICK.[165]

                        Fushamy in Japon, le 27th of September, 1617.


Loving frendes,--

Many letters have I written since my departure from Firando, but never
receved any from yow, but them two which yow wrot me 2 daies after I
departed from thence of arivall of _Sea Adventure_ at Tushma. Soe
that, the wynd having byn good ever since, I marvell I have not           292
heard from yow.

We have donne what we can both by word of mouth as also with
supplecation (or writing) to have had our previlegese enlarged, and
the rather by meanes of the Kinges Maties. letter sent themperour. But
in the end are forced to content us with them as they were, that is,
only for Firando and Langasaque. And because I was ernest to have had
it otherwais, the councell took the matter in snuffe, esteeming it a
presumption in me to aske lardger previlegese then all other strangers
had. So then I desird they would write a letter to the Kinges Matie.
of England, for my discharge, to show thoccation wherefore they did
it. But that they denid to doe, telling me that we might content our
selves with such composition as other men had, or, yf we did not lyke
it, might retorne to our cuntrey yf we pleased. So now I stay only to
get out our two _goshons_ for Syam and Cochinchina, and to get a
dispach from themperour, which will be 3 or 4 daies before I think it
will be ended. And then will I goe for Miaco to se yf we can doe any
good for sales. And then will I for Osakay and Sackay and look out for
the like, to se if I can procure plate to bring downe with me;
otherwais it will be late to send it per the shipp. I think it will be
15 or 20 daies hence before I shall be ready to set from Osakay
towardes Firando. So that, in the meane tyme, use your best endevour
to make sales of such merchandiz as are belo; and stand not upon small
matters to make ready money.

Yt were good, yf yow can, to receve the lead money in melted or
_somo_ plate, donne by a rendador, with themperours stampe upon
it, for then will it passe in saffetie. Or yt were better yf yow could
get it molten into bars lyke tyn bars, but of halfe the length, and of
the just goodnes with rialles of eight; for soe am I advised from
Bantam.

I went thother day to Miaco to have vizeted the Corean embassadors        293
with a present; but the _Tono_ of Tushma would not let me have accesse
unto them. So I turned back to Fushamy.

The _Tono_ of Xaxma, with them of Goto and Umbra, had leave to retorne
to their cuntres 2 or 3 daies past; but the _Tono_ of Firando cannot
be permitted as yet, although he be very ill at ease.

The ould _dire_ died som 8 or 10 daies past. But nether he nor his
sonne, which now is _daire_, will geve themperour the name or title he
soe much desireth; which geveth hym much discontent, as also the death
of one of his sisters whoe was marid to a greate man not far from
hence and died the other day.

The castell of Osakay must be new builded, with a pagod neare unto
Sackay, which weare destroied in these last wars; and all at
themperours owne cost. Only the westarne _tonos_ must furnish men; but
themperour will pay them, and not put any enhabetant to trowble about
the doing thereof.

Themperour hath geven greate presentes to the Coreans, as all the
greate _tonos_ of Japon have donne the like; but for what occation I
am not certen. This is all I know for the present; and so comit yow to
God, resting allwais

                         Your loving frend,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

For God sake take heed of fire; and forget not my pigions and fishes.
Comend me to all our frendes, both hees and howes.

  To his lovinge frendes, Mr. Wm. Nealson
    and Mr. John Osterwick, English
    merchantes, deliver in Firando. From
    Fushamy. Pay port. one _mas_ for
    letter and for other matters, as per
    adviz.

     [165] British Museum. _Cotton Charter_, iii, 13, f. 15.

                        -------------------


      RICHARD COCKS TO WILLIAM NEALSON AND JOHN OSTERWICK.[166]           294

                           Fushamy in Japon, le 1th of October, 1617.


Loving frendes,--

Yow will not beleeve what a trowble we have had about our previlegese,
and with much ado yistarday got Langasaque set in as well as Firando,
and soe sealed per themperour. But, before it could be delivered, som
took acceptions thereat, and so Langasaque is razed out againe, and
matters remeane as before. Yet this morning I have sent Capt. Adames
againe to get Goto and Shashma put in for shiping that, yf in case the
_Tono_ of Firando abuse us, we may have a retiring place, as also
to abcent our selves from the Hollanders, it not being to our content
to live together. But whether they will grant this or no, I know not.
Once we are put to Hodgsons choise[167] to take such previlegese as
they will geve us, or else goe without. My dowbt is, they will drive
us affe till the Emperour be gon (whoe they say will departe to
morrow), so thinking to make us follow them to Edo; but truly I will
rather leave all and retorne for Firando. I doe protest unto yow I am
sick to see their proceadinges, and canot eate a bit of meate that        295
doth me good, but cast it up as sowne as I have eaten it. God send me
well once out of this cuntrey, yf it be His blessed will. Mr. Wickham
and Capt. Adames are not halfe currant neather, as also our folkes
which came with us have byn sick, except Fatchman, Richard King
haveing had his part.

Kept till the 2th ditto.

Yisternight came your letters dated in Firando the 8th and 9th ultimo,
accompanid with the _goshon_, which came in good tyme (I
instantly sending it to the Cort where there was much enquiring for
it). Soe we gott out our _goshons_, but the privelegese as they
were the last yeare. Warry, warry, warry!

                         Your loving frend,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

God grant Tozayemon Dono do not play the jemeny with us in buying much
of our merchandiz and stay there till he think I am com from hence,
and so I shall nether meete hym heare nor theare, to make acco. with
hym. I have the lyke dowbt of Neyemon Dono.

  To his lovinge frendes, Mr. Wm. Nealson
    and Mr. Jno. Osterwick, English merchantes,
    deliver in Firando. From
    Fushamy.

     [166] British Museum. _Cotton Charter_, iii, 13, f. 17.

     [167] This early use of the proverbial "Hobson's choice" is
     almost conclusive against the usual explanation of the phrase,
     that it was derived from the method adopted by Hobson, the
     Cambridge carrier, in serving his customers with horses. Hobson
     was born in 1544 and died in 1630. Granting that the expression
     arose during his life-time, it could hardly have begun to pass
     into common usage before the close of the sixteenth century; and
     in those days such popular phrases were not communicated so fast
     as in ours. But here we find Cocks using it as early as 1617,
     after an absence of some years from England; and he would hardly
     have picked it up abroad. Again, Cocks was not a young man; and,
     as a rule, proverbs are learned and become part of our vocabulary
     in youth. "Hobson's choice" (or Hodgson's, as Cocks writes it)
     may very well have been an older popular saying which was applied
     to the Cambridge carrier's stable arrangements from the mere
     accident of his bearing the name he did.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[168]

                     Firando in Japon, the 15th of February, 1617[8].


Right worll. Ser and Sers,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Consernyng attempting trade into Cochinchina, yt was generally agreed
upon the last yeare, as I advized your Wor. in my letter; Ed. Sayer
being sent upon that busynes, and went in a junck of Mr. Wm. Adames,      296
he being both master and owner, and was to pay for fraight and passage
as other men did and according to the custom of the cuntrey, and carid
a cargezon goodes with hym.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Edmond Sayer retorned ... having donne his best endevour, with the
assistance of Mr. Wm. Adames, to learne out the truth of Mr. Peacockes
death. And fynd that he was murthered by a Japon, his host, with the
consent of one or two of the cheefest men about the kyng, and, as it
is said, the yong prince was of their councell, but the ould kyng
knoweth nothing thereof but that he was cast away by mere chance or
misfortune. These greate men and his host shared all the goodes and
money amongst them, as well of the Hollanders as thenglish whome were
slaine all together in one small boate, it being steamed or oversett
with a greater full of armed men. They are enformed that Mr. Peacockes
ill behaveor was partly occation; for at first the king used hym
kyndly and gave us larg previlegese to trade in his domynions. And one
day a greate man envited hym to dyner, and sent his cheefe page to
conduct hym, he being sonne to a greate man. But he coming into the
place wheare Mr. Peacock sate, he gave hym [hard] wordes and bad hym
goe out and sit with the boyes. And, as som say, being in drink, he
tore the previlegese the king had geven hym for free trade and cast
the peeces under his feete. These and other matters (which is reported
he did) did much estrang the peoples hartes from hym, and, as it was
thought by som whome saw how matters went, was the cheefe occation
which caused his death.

Mr. Adames and Ed. Sayer were very ernest to have had speech with the
kyng, which at first that greate nobelman was contented, as it seemed.
But, when he knew they would bring in question the murthering of Mr.
Peacock (he being giltie of it), he put them affe from tyme to tyme       297
with delaies, and in the end did flatly gainsay them. And, had they
gone, out of dowbt they had byn murthered in the way.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I am of your Wor. opinion that, except we procure trade into China, it
will not quite cost to mentayne a factory in Japon.... I have this
yeare byn againe at themperours court, in company of Mr. Wickham and
Mr. Wm. Adames, hoping to have got our previlegese enlarged, as
Codsquin Dono and Oyen Dono did put me in hope the last yeare.... We
gave the present to themperour as from his Matie., and amongst the
rest went a scritorio sent in adventure from my Lady Smith, esteemed
at 40 markes, with the gloves, mittens, looking glasse and other
silver implementes in it, with an other present aparte for the shipp,
as the Japon custom is. Which presentes were taken in good sort, with
many complementall wordes; but in the end were answered we had as larg
prevelegese as any other strangers, wherewith we might rest contented,
or, yf we fownd not trade to our content, we might departe when we
pleased and seeke better in an other place. So then I desird I might
have an answer to the letter he had receved from the Kinges Matie. of
England, wherby he might perceve I had delivered both letter and
present. But answer was made me, the letter was sent to his father,
Ogosho Samma, the deceased Emperor, and therefore held ominios amongst
the Japons to answer to dead mens letters. I aledged they needed not
to feare that we had any accoyntance with the pristes or padres; but
they tould me that was all one, the Emperour would have his owne
vassales to get the benefite to bring up merchandize rather then
strangers. So that now it has com to passe, which before I feared,
that a company of rich usurers have gotten this sentence against us,
and com downe together every yeare to Langasaque and this place, and
have allwais byn accustomed to buy by the _pancado_ (as they call         298
it), or whole sale, all the goodes which came in the carick from
Amacau, the Portingales having no prevelegese as we have, but only a
monson trade, and therefore must of necessety sell.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The Chinas of late tyme, within these 2 or 3 yeares, have begun a
trade into certen ilandes called by them Tacca Sanga, and is named in
our sea cardes Isla Fermosa, neare to the cost of China. The place the
shiping enters into is called Las Islas Piscadores, but non but small
shiping can enter, nether will they suffer any shiping or trade with
any people but Chinas. It is within 30 leagues (as they say) of the
meane of China, soe that they make 2 or 3 voyages in small shipping
each monson. Andrea Dittis and Capt. Whow, his brother, are the
greatest adventurers for that place. They sent 2 small junckes the
last yeare, and bought silke for the one halfe they pay ether at
Cochinchina or Bantam. The reason was the greate aboundance which came
together this yeare and the littell money that was sent to buy, so
that above one halfe was retorned into China for want of money, for
they say the people are barbarous and have not the use of silver.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I have rec. 2 letters from the Kynges Matie. to the King of China,
sent from Bantam by Mr. Ball, the one in frendly sort and the other
som stricter termes. Mr. Ball writes me that no Chinas at Bantam dare
nether translate them nor carry them when they are translated, upon
payne of their lives and even of all their generation. But these our
China frendes, Dittis and Whaw, will not only translate them, but send
them by such as will see them delivered. But their opinion is, yt is
not good to send the thretnyng letter, for they are assured there will
nothing be donne with the king by force. But as we have a good name       299
geven of us of late, that we are peacable people, soe to goe forward
still in that sort.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I had almost [forgotten to tell your Wor. of the coming of the]
ambassadors from the Kyng of Corea to the Emperour of Japon, having
above 500 men attending upon them. They went up at same tyme I went to
themperours court, and were, by the Emperours comand, royally
entertaind by all the _tonos_ (or kinges of Japon) thorow whose
terretories they passed, and all at the Japons charge, they first
begyning with the _Tono_ of Tushma, and next with hym of Firando,
etc.; and coming to the court the Emperour made them to dyne at his
owne table, they being served by all the _tonos_ (or kinges) of
Japon, every one having a head attire of a redish culler with a
littell mark of silver lyke a fether in it. Mr. Adames was in presence
and saw it.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

                 Your Wor. most humble at command,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the Right Worll. the Governor, deputy
    Committies, and Generallety of the
    East India Company, deliver in
    London.

     [168] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. v, no. 615.

                        -------------------


     RICHARD COCKS TO WILLIAM NEALSON AND JOHN OSTERWICK.[169]

                 Langasaque in Japon, this 21th of February, 1618[9].


Loving frendes,--

We arrived heare yisternight an hower before sunne seting, Capt.
Adames being arived the day before and came out and met us with the
China Capt., all the China junckes haveing out their flagges and
stremars, with St. George amongst the rest, and shott affe above 40
chambers and peeces of ordinance at my arivall.

I wish I had had noe _goshon_, for the trowble and vexation it puteth     300
me unto, and know not how to remedy it. Yet now it is concluded that
our _goshon_ shall goe in that new junck at Firando, and Capt. Adames
goeth capt. and pilot in her, for Tonkyne.

I have much speeches heare betwixt Alvaro Munos and Jorge Durons about
the caffro; but Alvaro Munos standeth stiffly to it that it is the
same caffro, and Jorge Durons saieth it is an other. I have delivered
Mr. Nealsons letter to Jorge, and in the end the truth will com out. I
know not what else to write, but leave yow to the protection of
thallmightie, resting

                         Your loving frend,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To his loving frendes, Mr. Wm. Nealson
    and Mr. Jno. Osterwick, English merchantes,
    deliver in Firando. From
    Langasaque.

     [169] British Museum. _Cotton Charter_, iii, 13, f. 35.

                        -------------------


               RICHARD COCKS TO JOHN OSTERWICK.[170]

                 Nangasaque in Japon, the 18th of February, 1619[20].


Loving frend, Mr. Osterwick,--

The next day after our departure from Firando, being the xvjth
currant, we arived at Nangasaque, having, the day before, mett with a
bark of Firando, which brought me a letter from Mr. Eaton and
therinclozed an other from yow. My letter I opened and read over, and
afterwardes sent it, with a few allmondes for Mr. Nealson, and your
letter with it, per the same partie and bark which brought it, to the
intent yow both might read it over and see the contentes. Yet I think
it will not prove soe dangerous a matter as at the reading of the
letter I suppozed it would have byn, for humors now and then are over
much predomenant in som men; but, as the saying is, _nemo sine
crimene vivet_. You must pardon me, yf I speak falce Latten.              301

Yistarday we sett our junckes mastes, and I hope will not now be long
before she will be ready. We fynd her to be biggar of stoadg then we
formerly expected.

I have byn with Capt. Adames at Gonrok Dono, and in thend concluded
the price of our lead at 5-1/2 _tais_ the _pico_. But Gonrok will
first speake with themperours _bongews_ or councellors thereof, and,
in the meane tyme, will deliver us eight hundred _taies_ in parte of
payment, and will send a man to way out all the lead, and leave it in
our howse till order com downe to take it and pay the rest of the
money. And, as Gonrok tells me, the Hollanders have made prise at 5
_taies pico_, and waid it all and delivered it into the handes of the
King of Firando. But I esteem this but a tale. And so I comit yow to
thallmightie, resting

                         Your loving frend,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To his loving frend, Mr. Wm. Nealson,
    English merchant, deliver in Firando.
    From Nangasaque. This letter should
    be derected Mr. Jno. Osterwick, etc.

     [170] British Museum. _Cotton Charter_, iii, 13, f. 37.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[171]

                   Nangasaque in Japon, the 10th of Marche, 1619[20].


Right worll. Ser and Sers,--

After my humble dutie remembred, may it please yow to understand that,
by the indirect dealinges and unlooked for proceadinges of the
Hollanders, this is the therd yeare since we hadd any shipping came
from England or Bantam to Japan. Neather in all this tyme have we had
any conveance to enforme your Worshipps of the manifold abuses
offered unto us within these kingdoms of Japon, notwithstanding the       302
lardge prevelegese we have from the Emperour that the Japons them
selves may not meddell with us. Yet these Hollanders have, by sound of
trumpet abord all their shipps in the harbour of Firando, procleamed
open warrs against our English nation, both by sea and land, with fire
and sworde, to take our shipps and goods and destroy our persons to
the uttermost of their power, as to their mortall enemies.

And their cheefe comander which came hither last, called Adam
Westerwood, sett my life at sale, offering 50 R. of 8 to any man that
could kill me, and 30 R. for each other Englishman they could kill;
which their proceadinges could not be soe secretly donne, but I hadd
dailie notis thereof by som of their owne people, although they were
comanded upon payne of death to the contrary. And because your Wors.
shall understand all how it hath passed, it is as hereafter followeth,
viz.:--

After that the comander (as they call hym), Jno. Derickson Lamb, came
hither from the Molucos and passed by the Manillias, where he took
divers China junckes and staid soe long on that cost that the Spanish
gallions came out against hym and sunck the admerall shipp, called the
_New Sunne_, wherein Derickson Lamb hym selfe was, whoe escaped very
hardly abord an other shipp, wherein he came to Japon. The Spaniardes
also burned two other of the Hollandes fleete, and made all the rest
to run away, without losse of any Spanish shipp, etc.

And Jno. Derickson Lamb, going away, left the _Ould Sunne_, a great
ship with 38 or 40 peeces ordinance in her, with an other shipp,
called the _Gallias_, of 300 tonns, as they say, with 30 peeces of
ordinance in her, and sent them abootehawling one the cost of China,
and from thence to the Manillias, where they h[ad] the rifling of xvi
seale of China junckes, and filled them with such as they liked and       303
sett the rest on fire, and brought the China junckes along with them,
being the best and ruchliest laden, puting som 8 or 9 Hollanders into
each junck; but, by fowle wether at sea, they lost company of the
shipps, soe that the Chinas, being too strong for the Hollanders, cut
all their throtes, and carid all the junckes into China, as we hadd
certen newes thereof.

These 2 shipps, the _Sunne_ and _Gallias_, arived at Firando the 6th
and 8th day of June, 1618. And the 8th day of August after heare
arived an English shipp, called the _Attendance_, which the Hollanders
sent hither from the Molucas, to our greater disgrace, but not an
Englishman in her. So that, by generall consent, it was thought fitt I
went to themperours court to complaine, thinking we might have hadd
restetution, considering the lardge preveleges we have in Japon. But
answer was made that for factes comitted in other places themperor
would not meddell with it, but for anything donne in his owne
dominions he would see us have right.

Soe the three forenamed shipps, _Sunne_, _Gallias_, and _Attendance_,
were sett out againe, the _Sunne_ to carry their most best stuffes and
silke, her full lading, to goe for Bantam; and the other two to goe
for the Manillas, to meete an other Hollandes fleete, because they had
certen news that 6 of the King of Spaines gallions were cast away per
misfortune at Manillas, which was true, soe that the Spaniardes hadd
no strength to com out against them. Soe they took 3 China junckes
more, but noe greate wealth in them, only they found such good
refreshing that it saved the lives of their hongerstarved men;
otherwaies they hadd never lived to see Japon.

Soe now may it please your Wors. to understand this last yeare, I
meane reckning before Christmas, here cam 7 seale of Hollanders for
this cuntrey of Japon and to this towne of Firando, viz.:--

1. The _Bantam_, a shipp of 1000 tonns, wherin Adam Westerwood came.      304

2. The _New Moone_, a shipp of 7 or 800 tonns, vizadmerall.

3. The _Gallias_ before named, of above 300 tonns.

4. The _Attendance_, thenglish shipp before named.

5. The _Swan_, an other English shipp taken by them at Molucas.

And out of these shipps 3 Englishmen escaped ashore and came to
thenglish howse to seeke releefe, telling us they were used more like
dogges then men amongst the Hollanders. Their names are as followeth:
John Moore, John Joones, Edward Curwin; these 3 men brought presoners
in Hollandes shipps. The Hollanders demanded these 3 men to be
retorned back unto them; unto whome I made answer, I would first see
their comition how they durst presume to take our English shiping,
men, and goodes, as they did. So then they went to the _Tono_ (or
King) of Firando, and demanded that their English _kengos_ (which in
Japons is sclaves) should be sent back unto them. Unto whome the
_tono_ made answer that he took not the English to be sclaves to the
Hollanders, we having such lardge preveleges in Japon as we hadd, and
therefore willed them to goe to themperour and demand them of hym, and
what he ordayned should be performed, etc.

Also their came a penisse from the Molucas, called the _Fox_, to bring
newes of the fight betwixt thenglish fleete and the Hollanders att
Jaccatra, and that these shipps should make hast to the Molucas with
powder, shott, victuelles, and other provition, etc.

And last of all came an other greate shipp from Pattania, called the
_Angell_, being the admerall of 3 shipps which came together and sent
of purpose to take the _Samson_ and _Hownd_, two other English shipps,
wherin Capt. Jno. Jourden, the presedent, came cheefe comander; they
Hollanders coming upon them on a sudden as they road at an ancor in       305
the roade of Pattania, nott dowbting any such matter, where they took
both the said shipps, after the death of Capt. Jourden and others. Out
of which shipp _Angell_ Mr. Wm. Gourden and Michell Payne escaped
ashore, by the assistance of Mr. Wm. Adames; otherwais they hadd byn
sent captives (as the Duch terme it) to the Molucas. Mr. Gourden was
master of the _Hownd_, and Michell Payne carpenter of the _Samson_. As
also a Welchman, named Hugh Williams, escaped from them and came to
the English howse the morrow after. By which 3 men, as also by an open
letter which I receved from Mr. Adam Denton from Pattania in the Duch
shipp _Angell_, we understand of the proceadinges of the Hollanders
against our nation; the copie of which letter I send your Wors. here
inclozed.

But to conclud the unruly dealinges of the Hollanders: when they saw
they could not by any meanes gett back the Englishmen which escaped
from them, allthough they laid secrett ambushes ashore to have taken
them, which being reveled to me by som of their owne people, then they
came to outbrave us in the streetes before our owne dores, urging us
with vild speeches; soe that from words som of our people and they
fell to blowes, where one of the Hollanders got a scram, which made
the rest soe madd that they came on shore by multetudes, thinking by
force to have entred into our howse and cutt all our throates, geveing
3 assaltes in one day. Yet the Japons took our partes, that they could
doe us no harme, although there were v. or vj. C. of them against v.
or vj. persons of us. And the next day morning after, when we thought
nothing, a company of them entred our howse, armed with piks, swordes,
and _cattans_, where they wounded John Coaker and an other, thinking
they hadd kild one of them at least, as they made their bragges after.
Soe that we weare constrayned to keepe in our howse a gard of Japons,
night and day, armed, at meate, drink, and wages, to your Wors. greate    306
charge. Soe that the king of Firando comanded watch and ward to be
kept in the streetes, that noe Hollanders might be suffered to passe
by our dores. But then they went in swarmes by water, shaking their
naked swords at us, calling us by a thousand filthie names; which
coming to the knowledg of the _tono_, he sent for Capt. Jacob Speck,
princepall (or cape merchant) of the Hollanders in Japon, and caused
hym to geve a writing in Japons before witnesses, with his ferme at
it, that from that tyme forward no Hollander should misuse an
Englishman, nether in word nor deed, and then caused me, Richard
Cocks, to geve an other to the same effect, with my ferme at it,
before the same witnesses, that noe Englishman should doe the like to
any Hollanders. Yet, before 3 or 4 daies were passed, the Hollanders
began againe to misuse us; for that Edmond Sayer, being retorned of a
voyage he hadd made for your Wors. affares to Cochinchina and arived
at Nangasaque, sentt Richard King to Firando to advertis me thereof
and to bring our _foyfone_ (or bark) with hym to carry the comodetis
he hadd brought to Firando. But as the said Ric. King was going out in
the said bark, accompanied with our _jurebasso_, the Hollanders armed
out five or six barkes or shipp boates after them, full of men, with
guns, pikes, swordes, and other weapons, and took hym presoner with
the bark and carid hym to the Hollands howse, using hym very
churlishly. The _tono_ being an eye witnesse and looker on when they
did it, mooved hym soe much that he sent out certen boates full of
souldiers after them, to have reskewed Ric. King; but they came to
late, for the Hollanders hadd carried hym into their howse before they
came. Soe the souldiers laid hand on Capt. Speck hym selfe and carid
hym presoner to the _tonos_ howse, where he remeaned most parte of the
day, till Richard King was sett free.

But this matter was noe sowner overpast but our junck arived from         307
Syam, wherin Mr. Eaton came and advized me of their arivall on this
coast, and to send them a boate or two to helpe to toe them in, which
I did; and Ed. Sayer, Richard Kinge, and John Coaker went in them with
our _jurebasso_. But, passing by the Hollandes shipps in this harbor,
they bent a peece of ordinance against them, which took falce fire.
Which they seeing, discharged 4 or 5 muskettes at them with langarell
(or cheane) shott; but, by greate fortune, missed the Englishmen and
kild a Japon. Which open injuries being offered against us in Japon
(contrary to the preveleges geven us by the Emperour), yt was thought
fitt (and agreed upon by a generall councell) that I should goe to the
court of the Emperour of Japon, to make their doinges knowne unto his
Matie. and to demand justice; which I did, with much labour and greate
cost to your Wors. And order was geven by the Emperours comand and his
previe councell to the _Tono_ or King of Firando to heare both parties
and see justis performed. Yet, from that tyme till now, there is
nothing donne, although I have divers tymes very instantly desired it
of the kinge, whose best answer I eaver could gett was, that the
Hollanders had kild no Englishman, but a Japonar, his owne vassale,
which yf he were content to pardon, what hadd I to doe therwith?

And that which is worse, we being makinge cables for our junck in the
streetes of Firando, the servantes of a gentelman called Semi Dono
picked a quarrell against Ed. Sayer as he, Wm. Eaton, and Jno.
Osterwick were looking on the workmen; and, without any reazon came
out against them with clubbs and staves, and knockt downe Ed. Sayer,
wounding hym very sore; and the rest escaped not free, but were
shrodly beaten, and, hadd they not by good fortune gotten into a
howse, they hadd kild them all. For the which abuse I went first to
Semi Dono to complaine, but he would not vouchsaffe to speake to          308
me. Soe I complained to the kinge, thinking to have hadd justice; but,
to the contrary, he sent me word that by councell he hadd banished two
men of Semi Donos out of his dominions, which were the authors
thereof, as he did the like by Edmond Sayer, telling me that, yf I did
not forthwith send hym to Nangasaque, he would geve orders to kill hym
the first tyme he went out of the dores into the street. Unto which I
made answer, it was against the preveleges geven us by the Emperour,
desiring hym to lett me pleade for my selfe, to show my greefes, or
else lett the matter be brought before the Emperour. But the kinge
would not heare me speak any ferther in this matter, but badd me stand
to the danger, yf I sent hym not away. Yet still I pleaded that the
Hollanders hadd donne much more, even to the killinge of Japons, and
yet were not banished nor any thing said to them for it, nether for
any other abuses offered against us; and Ed. Sayer nor no other
Englishman hadd nether wounded nor hurt any Japon for this matter he
was banished for, yet he hym selfe being wounded almost to death. But
all would not serve, soe that I was constrayned to send Ed. Sayer to
Nangasaque, and soe from thence to goe for Bantam or any other place
where the English fleete is, to geve the precedent and cheefe
comanders to understand thereof, etc.

For may it please your Wors. to understand that, having soe many
Englishmen lying idly in the factory, with those which were heare
before, and noe shipping to carry them away, as well to avoid charg of
howse keepinge as also to geve your Wors. to understand how matters
passe, it was ordayned per a general councell to buy a small _soma_ or
vessell of som 50 tonns, to carry these men whose names follow (at
their owne ernest request) to seek out the fleete in Java, Sumatra, or
else wheare, to helpe to fight against the commune enemie, as they
have procleamed them selves, I meane the Hollander, as also to            309
carry gunpowder, shott, beefe, pork, biskitt, tunnie fish, and other
provition, soe much as conveniently the vessell can carry. The names
of the Englishmen which goe are as followeth, viz:--Edmond Sayer,
James Burges, Thomas Harod, Wm. Gorden, Robt. Hawley, Jno. Portes,
Migell Payne, John Coaker, John Moore, John Joones, Ed. Curwine, Jno.
Yonge, Hugh Williams, Peeter Griffine. Also there goe 9 Japon
marrenars with them for their more strengthning, as also because their
seals are of mattes, after the Japon fation, wherin they are more
expert then our English men. And, for their better defence they carry
4 falcons, 2 of brasse and 2 of iron, with 2 long brasse bases, 2
fowlars or murtherers, 3 hargabush of crock, 5 English muskettes, and
8 Japon calivers, with good powder and shott suffitient, etc. The
junck name is called the _Godspeed_, of the burthen of 50 tonns or
upwardes, and cost us iiij C. xxx _tais_ first peny, being open behind
as all _somas_ are, but we have made her now to steare shipp fation.
God prosper her and send them a good voyage.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Truly to my hartes greefe I am eavery day more then other out of hope
of any good to be donne in Japon, except trade may be procured into
China, which I am not yet out of hope of. Although Capt. Whaw of
Nangasaque be dead, whoe was a cheefe dealer hearin, yet his brother,
Capt. Andrea Dittis of Firando, tells me it is concluded upon, and
that he expects a kinsman of his to com out of China with the
Emperours passe, promesing to goe hym selfe with me in person, when we
have any shipping com to goe in; for in Japon shipping we cannot goe
for China. This Andrea Dittis is now chosen capten and cheefe comander
of all the Chinas in Japon, both at Nangasaque, Firando, and else
wheare, and I trust in God will prove the author in soe happie a
matter as to gett trade into China.

But of all the merchandiz we have this last yeare, before Christmas       310
came, from Syam, Cochinchina, and Tonkyn, as reed wood, lead, deare
skins, and silke of severall prices, we cannot make sale of any thing;
which maketh me to wonder, for the other yeare before was much greater
quantety of all comodetis and yet sould dearer.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Our lead, which never heretofore lesse then 6 _tais_, now worth 5
_tais_; but none dare buy it for feare of themperour. Soe I have set
it at 5-1/2 _tais pico_. But themperours _bongew_ will not take it
absolutely at that price, before he have made it knowne to themperours
councell, he being now bond up to the court and called thither per
themperour, as it is thought to put an other in his place, which God
forbid; he being now ruch is better to be dealt withall, but, yf a new
hongry fello com, he will gnawe to the very boanes, as others
heretofore have fownd by experience, two or three haveing byn changed
in my time. But that which cheefly spoileth the Japon trade is a
company of ruch usurers whoe have gotten all the trade of Japon into
their owne handes; soe that heretofore by theare meanes we lost our
preveleges geven us per Ogosho Samma themperour, wherin he permitted
us to trade into all partes of Japon not excepted, and now per this
Emperour Shongo Samma we are pend up in Firando and Nangasaque only,
all other places forbidden us. For they have soe charmed themperour
and his councell, that it is in vayne to seeke for remedy. And these
fellowes are nott content to have all at their owne disposing above,
but they com downe to Firando and Nangasaque, where they joyne
together in seting out of junckes for Syam, Cochinchina, Tonkin,
Camboja, or any other place where they understand that good is to be
donne, and soe furnish Japon with all sortes of comodeties which any
other stranger can bring, and then stand upon their puntos, offering
others what they list them selves, knowing no man will buy it but         311
them selves or such as they please to joyne in company with them,
nether that any stranger can be suffered to transport it into any
other parte of Japon. Which maketh me alltogether aweary of Japon.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

And for our English broad cloth, I canot find that any greate quantety
will be vented in Japon. For they use it not in garmentes, except som
fewe in an outward cloak or garment now of late. But the greatest use
they put it to is for cases or coveringes for armours, pikes,
_langenattes_, _cattans_, or sables, with muskettes or guns. And the
best cullars are stametes or blackes, with reddes, for venting any
quantetie. And the best tyme is against warrs, for then every noble
man will have his armours and munition sett out in gallant sort. But
clothes of above xxli. str. a whole clo. are too deare for Japon, for
they doe not respect soe much the fynenesse of the cloth as they do
the quantetie of the measure. And the cullers which are best after
black and redd are sadd blewes, culler du roy, or mingled cullers
neare unto that of culler due roy.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

So that, to conclude this tediouse and unprofitable discourse, I
esteem our Japon trade alltogether unprofetable, yf wee procure not
trade into China. But, yf it please God that your Wors. lay hould or
determen to sett foote in the Molucas, then Japon must be your store
howse, as it is the Hollanders. For from hence they make their
provition in aboundance, viz. great ordinance both of brasse and iron,
with powder and shott good cheape; beefe and pork, in greate
quantetie; meale and bisquite, as much as they will; garvances, or
small peaze or beanes, in abondance; and dried fish lyke a breame,
called heare _tay_, in aboundance; tunnie fish salted, in greate
quantetie; rack or aquavite, of any sort, in aboundance; rice, in what
quantetie they will; with other sortes of Japon wine made of rise,        312
what they will; and pilchardes, in greate quantetie, either pickled or
otherwais. And for provition of shiping, either tymber or plankes,
with mastes, yardes, or what else to make a shipp, with good
carpenters to work it, as also rozen or pitch enough, but no tarr.
Also ther is hempe indifferent to make cables, and them which can
resonably well work it. And for iron work, neales, and such lyke,
there is noe want, and smiths that can make ancors of hamer work of 20
or 30 C. wight, yf need be; for such have byn made for carickes which
came from Amacon to Nangasaque, etc.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Also heretofore at severall tymes I have sent my acco. to Bantam,
according to your Wor. order, with coppies thereof, to the precedent
or cheefe in that place, the other to be sent for England. Yet, as I
understand, they have detayned all at Bantam and sent non for England;
and Mr. Balle per name hath wrott to some Englishmen in this place,
whoe loved me not soe littell but they shewed me his letters, wherin
he taxed my acco. to be erronios and alltogether falce and fetched
about with a trick beyond rule, soe that he wondered they should jumpe
soe neare in ballance, being soe notably falce. But yf Mr. Balle hadd
byn soe good a frend unto me as he would make me to beleeve in som
lynes of his letters (yet he never gave me roast meate but he did
beate me with the spitt)--I beeseeke your Wors. to pardon me yf I be
too forward of tonge herein--I say, yf Mr. Balle had ought me soe much
good will, yt hadd byn a frendly parte to have amended that which hadd
byn amiss, yf such were to be donne, and then to have sent the acco.
forward, and not to keepe all back, saying it was falce or
erronios.... My greefe is, I lie in a place of much losse and expence
to your Wors. and no benefitt to my selfe, but losse of tyme in my
ould adge, allthough God knoweth my care and paines is as much as yf      313
benefite did come thereby. Yet truly, yf the tyme or place, or other
occation amend it not, I shall, as I came a pore man out of England,
retorne a beggar home, yf your Wor. have noe consideration thereof,
although your Wor. shall never find that I have byn a gamstar or
riatouse person which have spent eather your Wor. or my owne goodes
riatosly or out of order. I beseek your Wors. to pardon my overbould
speeches hearin. But, yf it hadd pleased God that Generall Keeling or
any other your Wors. apointed hadd com to Japon to have overseene the
affares in this factory, it would have byn a greate comfort unto me
and ridd me of a greate deale of care; for most an end for the space
of two yeares Mr. Nealson hath byn very sick, and Mr. Jno. Osterwick
littell lesse, and both of them at this instant soe extreame sick that
I dowbt much of their recovery, which hath [byn] and is a hinderance
to me in the proceadinges of acco. and writing out of coppies, they
two being all the helpe I have hadd, others going abroad on voyages
for your Wor. affares. God of his mercy send them their healthes, for
they are soe weake that I esteeme they cannot write by this conveance
nether to your Wors. nor noe other frendes.

And, whereas heretofore I wrott your Wors. that Shongo Samma, the
Emperour that now is, had shortned our preveleges, that we should
trade into noe other partes of Japon but only Nangasaque and Firando,
and our shipping to goe only to Firando, now he hath permitted us to
goe with our shipps for Nangasaque as well as Firando at our chose.
And the harbor at Nangasaque is the best in all Japon, wheare there
may 1,000 seale of shipps ride land lockt, and the greatest shipps or
carickes in the world may goe in and out at pleasure and ride before
the towne within a cables length of the shore in 7 or 8 fathom water
at least, yt being a greate cittie and many ruch marchantes dwelling      314
in it, where, to the contrary, Firando is a fisher towne and a very
small and badd harbor, wherin not above 8 or 10 shipps can ride at a
tyme without greate danger to spoile one other in stormy weather; and
that which is worst, noe shipping can enter in or out of that harbour,
but they must have both tide and winde as also 8 or 10 penisses or
barkes to toe them in and out, the currant runeth soe swift that
otherwaies they canot escape runing ashore; where, to the contrary,
there is no such mattar at Nangasaque, yt being one of the fairest and
lardgest harbours that eaver I saw, wherinto a man may enter in and
goe out with shiping at all tymes, the wind serving, without helpe of
boate or penisse. And in Nangasaque there is noe king nor noble man,
but only the Emperours _bongew_ (or governar) of the place; soe that
we need not to geve presentes to more then one at any shipps entring.
But at Firando there is the king hym selfe, with two of his brothers,
and 3 or 4 of his uncles, besides many other noble men of his kindred;
all which look for presentes, or else it is no living amongst them;
and that which is more, they are allwaies borowing and buying, but
sildom or neaver make payment, except it be the king hym selfe. So
that it maketh me altogether aweary to live amongst them, we not being
abell to geve and lend them as the Hollanders doe, whoe geve them
other mens goods which they neaver paid for. Soe that they are
accompted better then true men and better used then we, as apeareth by
banishing Ed. Sayer without any occation, which it may be the _Tono_
of Firando may repent before it be long, and, as som say, wisheth
allready it were undon; for I have written to Syam, Pattania, and
Bantam, that yf they send any shipping for Japon hearafter, that my
opinion is, and the rest of the Englishmen heare are the lyke, to send
them for Nangasaque, where the governor offereth to lett us have a
plott of ground or to take a house in any place of the cittie where we
lyke best. So that now many tyme and often we have wished that your       315
Wor. howsing att Firando stood at Nangasaque, which heretofore was not
thought fitt, because then a papist Portingale bushopp lived in the
towne and ther was 10 or 12 parish churches, besids monestaries, all
which are now pulld downe to the grownd this yeare, an end being made
thereof; and the places where all such churches and monestaries weare,
with the churchyords, are all turned into streetes, and all the dead
mens boanes taken out of the grownd and cast forth for their frendes
and parentes to bury them where they please. I doe not rejoyce herin,
but wish all Japon were Christians; yet in the tyme of that bushopp
heare were soe many prists and Jesuists with their partakers, that one
could not passe the streetes without being by them called Lutranos and
herejos, which now we are very quiet and non of them dare open his
mouth to speake such a word.

And soe, beseeching the God of heaven to blesse and prosper your Wors.
in all your proceadinges, I humbly take my leave, restinge

             Your Wors. most humble servant at command,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the Right Wor. the Governor, Depute
    Committis, and Generalletie of the East
    India Company of England deliver in
    London. Per the way of Bantam in
    the juncke _Godspeed_, whom God preserve.

     [171] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. vii, no. 841.

                        -------------------


          RICHARD COCKS TO THE CLOTHWORKERS' COMPANY.[172]

                   Nangasaque in Japon, the 10th of Marche, 1619[20].


Right worll. Ser and Serrs,--

May it please yow to understand that, since my arivall in Japon in
these eastarne partes of the world, I wrot yow an other letter by a
Dutch chirurgion, called Mr. Abraham Blancard, advising your Wors.        316
of my long voyadge into these partes, passing by Cape Bona Speranza,
the Redd Sea, Bantam in Java major, the Molucas, and soe to the
eastwardes of the Phillipinas into these kingdoms of Japon, wheare now
I have remeaned allmost the space of vij yeares. Of the which I
thought good to adviz your Wors. of the just occation of my abcense,
to the entent I fall into noe broake for the neclecting thereof, as I
know others have donne. I also wrot your Wors. from Bayon in France to
same effect, many yeares past, by a Duchman of Middebrogh, called
James Vrolick. Which former letters I make no dowbt came unto your
Wors. handes, etc.

Allso, may it please yow to understand that we are much molested in
these partes of the world with the unruly Hollanders, whoe have
procleamed open warrs against our English nation both by sea and land,
and to take our shipps and goods and kill our persons as their mortall
enemies, wheresoever they find us. And, for better proof thereof, they
broght two English shipps this yeare into Japon, out of which 3
Englishmen escaped and came to our English howse for releefe. The
shipps names taken weare, viz. the _Swan_ and the _Attendance_.

They took also two other English shipps this yeare, riding at an ancor
in the roade of Pattania, not dowbting any such matter, three
Hollandes shipps coming upon them on the sudden. In which hurly burly
Capt. John Jourden, our precedent of the Indies, lost his life, with
many others. One of which 3 shipps (which took them) came this yeare
to Firando in Japon, out of whome escaped other 3 Englishmen and came
to the English howse for releefe, as the former did; by whome we
understood the shipps taken weare the _Samson_ and the _Hownde_; the
Hollanders at Firando takeing their escape in such dudgin that they
demanded their captives (as it pleased them to call them) to be
deliverd back againe unto them. Unto whome I answered that I would
first see their comition, how they durst presume to take our shipping,    317
goods, and persons, as they did. Unto which they replied nothing, but
went to the _Tono_ (or King) of Firando, demanding of hym that their
English slaves (as they termed them) might be retorned back unto them.
Unto whome he answerd he took not Englishmen to be slaves to them,
but, yf they pretended any such matter, they might goe to the
Emperour, and what he ordayned should be performed. Soe they, seeing
their expectations frustrated, ment to have entred our English howse
and cut all our throates; which they wanted but littell to have
effected, geving 3 assalts against us in one day, they being 100 of
them to 1 Englishman; yet God preserved us from them, the Japoneses,
our neighbours, taking our partes. Soe that then their generall or
cheefe comander, called Adam Westarwood, sett my life at sale,
promesing 50 rialles of 8 to any one would kill me, and 30 of the like
for the life of each other English merchant, with many other
stratagems they used against us too long to be repeated. Yet God
hitherto hath defended us from them all. Of the which I thought good
to advertis your Wors., knowing well that many of yow are of this
Right Honble. and Right Worll. Sosietie or Companie which trade into
the East Indies, of which I my selfe am a pore and unworthie member,
as I am the like of the Merchantes Adventurars and made free of the
ould Hance.

And soe, with my humble dutie remembred, with desire and my prayer
unto Allmightie God to blesse and prosper your Wors. in all your
proceadinges, I leave yow to the holy tuition of thallmightie.

       By an unworthie membar of your Right. Worll. Sosietie,

                                             RIC. COCKS, Clothworker.

     [172] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. vii, no. 839.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[173]                    318

                        Firando in Japon, the 13th of December, 1620.


Right Worll. Ser and Sers,--

After my humble dutie remembred. May it please yow to understand that
my last letter was dated in Nangasaque the 10th of Marche, 1619, sent
per a small junck or vessell called the _Godspeed_ to seek out our
English fleete at Bantam or else wheare; but, meeting with stormy
wether and contrary windes at sea, lost their voyadge, having their
seales blowen from the yardes, and lost all their cables and ancors
but one, and with much ado in the end retorned to this port of
Firando. The said letters I send againe by this conveance; unto the
which I refer me.

Also may it please your Wor. to understand that this yeare are arived
in Japon these shipps following, viz.:--

The _James Royall_ came the first, and brought news of the peace made
betwixt the two Companies. God be praised for it; and God grant the
Duch may as fermly follow the orders prescribed as I make no dowbt the
English will doe, and then their will noe occation of discontent be
offered hereafter. The cheefe comander in the _James_ is Capt. Martyn
Pring.

The _Moone_ came next; Capt. Robt. Addames, comander and admerall.

The _Palsgreve_; Charles Clevenger, capt.

The _Elizabeth_; Edmond Lennis, capt.

The _Bull_; Mr. John Munden, master or capt.

The _Unicorne_ and English _Hope_ have lost their monson, soe we know
not what is becom of them, except they retorned back to Pattania or
Jaccatra; which God grant.

And there are arived heare for the Hollanders this yeare:--

  all Holland shipps.                                                     319
    The _New Bantam_; Jno. Johnson, comander, and vizadmerall
      to Capt. Adams.
    The _Trowe_; Capt. Lefevre, comander.
    The _Harlam_; Wm. Jonson, master.
    The Duch _Hope_; Henrock Valche, capt.
    The _Indraught_, a merchant shipp.
  both English shipps.
    The _Swan_; Mr. Howdane, comander
    The _Expedition_, cast away in Firando.

And the Hollanders want a shipp called the _St. Michell_, a French
shipp, which should have come hether this yeare but hath lost her
monson.

The _James Royall_ and the _Moone_ weare both sheathed heare this
yeare, and the _Bull_ all masted, and the rest repared to content; and
all the shiping disposed of as followeth, viz.:--

The _James Royall_ fall laden with provition for us and Duch for
Jaccatra, and soe from thence pretended to goe for England.

The _Indraught_ for the Molucos, laden with provition for the
Hollanders.

The _Swan_, said to doe the like for Jaccatra or Bantam.

The _Expedition_, cast away in this port at an ancor in a greate
storme and not to be recovered.

  All bound for the Manillas.
    English shipps.
      The _Moone_
      The _Palsgreve_
      The _Elizabeth_
      The _Bull_
    Holland shipps.
      The _New Bantam_
      The _Trowe_
      The _Harlam_
      The Duch _Hope_

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I doe verely think the furnishing and setting out these 5 shipps afore
named will stand your Wors. in above ten thousand poundes starling;
but I canot justly tell it. Nether dare any man buy the lead but          320
themperour only; and his councell sett the price from tyme to tyme as
they please. Soe this yeare, per generall consent, there weare 4 men
sent up to themperours cort with presentes. They departed from hence
the last of August, and as yet are not retorned:

  for thenglish,
    Capt. Charles Cleavenger
    Mr. Joseph Cockram
  for the Hollanders,
    Capt. Lafebre
    Matias van der Brook

whome, as we understand per their letters, are frendly entertayned
both of themperour and his councell, but stay longer for a dispach
then they thought of, by reason of the taking of a friggat which came
from Manillias, wherin weare both Portingals, Spaniardes, and Japons,
and amongst the rest ij semenary pristes (or Jesuists), people
defended not to com into Japon, which maketh the better for us. Yet we
know not whether themperour will let us have it for good prize or noe,
till our men retorne from Edo, of the which I will certefie your Wor.
per my next.

I did make full accompt to have retorned for England this yeare, but
that Mr. Thomas Brockedon and Mr. Augusten Spalding, presedentes at
Bantam, wrot me the want of merchantes in the factory as also to send
along in these shipps, willing me to furnish their want out of this
factory, which, God willing, I will, and wish I might have byn one of
them my selfe. But I hope the next yeare som new supplies may be sent
for this factory, to thentent I may now retorne for my cuntrey, I
having now served your Wors. a prentishipp of ten yeares since I
departed out of England; and I know there hath not wanted som to geve
bad reportes of me to your Wors., but I hope to cleare my selfe before
your Wors., yf God spare my life.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Also may it please your Wors. to understand that Mr. Wm. Nealson          321
departed out of this life in Marche last, being wasted away with a
consumption, and before divers witnesses gave me all he had both in
these partes and else wheare, as I have it under their handes to shew;
and yf God had called me to His mercy before Mr. Nealson, then had he
had as much of myne.

And our good frend Capt. Wm. Adames, whoe was soe longe before us in
Japon, departed out of this world the xvjth of May last, and made Mr.
Wm. Eaton and my selfe his overseers, geveing the one halfe of his
estate to his wife and childe in England and the other halfe to a
sonne and a doughter he hath in Japon. The coppie of his will with an
other of his inventory (or acco. of his estate) I send to his wife and
doughter per Capt. Marten Pring, their good frend well knowne to them
long tyme past. And I have delivered one hundred poundes starling to
divers of the _James Royalls_ company, enterd into the purcers book,
to pay two for one in England, is two hundred poundes strling, to Mrs.
Adames and her doughter. For yt was not his mind his wife should have
all, in regard she might marry an other husband and carry all from his
childe, but rather that it should be equally parted betwixt them. Of
the which I thought good to adviz your Wors. And the rest of his
debtes and estate being gotten in, I will ether bring or send it per
first occation offerd and that may be most for their profett,
according as the deceased put his trust in me and his other frend, Mr.
Eaton.

I know not what else to write your Wors., only, as yet, there is noe
order com out of China to let us have trade, for that the Hollanders
men of warr have shut up their trade that few dare look out. And,
besids, the Cheenas them selves robb on an other at sea, thinking to
lay all the falt on the Dutch and English; but som have byn
intersepted in som provinces of Japon and paid dearly for it. And
other China shipping, being sett out of Nangasaque by their owne          322
cuntremen to goe for Isla Formosa (called by them Tacca Sanga) to
trade for silke, are run away for China with all the money and left
their cuntremen in Japon in the lurch.

And for all other matters I refer my selfe to the relation of my
worll. frend Capt. Martine Pring, the bringer hereof; and soe leave
your Wors. with your affares to the holy protection of thallmightie,
resting allwais

             Your Wors. most humble servant at command,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [173] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. vii, no. 911.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[174]

                        Firando in Japon, the 14th of December, 1620.


Right worll. Ser and Serrs,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I canot but be sorofull for the losse of such a man as Capt. Wm.
Adames was, he having byn in such favour with two Emperours of Japon
as never was any Christian in these partes of the worlde, and might
freely have entred and had speech with themperours, when many Japon
kinges stood without and could not be permitted. And this Emperour
hath conformed the lordshipp to his sonne which thother Emperour gave
to the father.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Yt is strang to see the changes of merchandizing soe altered since our
first arivall in Japon; for heretofore yearly white raw silk was sould
at 500, 400, and 300 _taies_ the _pico._ at least, and now it is
fallne to 130, yea som have sould for 105 _taies_ the _pico._ this
yeare, which 3 yeares past was worth 300 _tais pico._ The reason is, a
company of ruch men have got all the trade of Japon into their handes.
Soe they agree all together and will not buy but at what price they       323
think good them selves; and is not to be remedied.

And it is geven out that themperour will defend that noe more lead
shall com into Japon till this greate quantety brought by us and the
Hollanders be spent. For the Hollanders brought in their shipping this
yeare 4000 _pico_. Eng. lead and 1000 _pico_. from Syam in their
junck. Soe that the Hollanders have 5000 _pico_. lead com this yeare;
but a great part of it is small barrs, such as is com in our shiping
this yeare, and I think taken out of our English shipping which they
took heretofore.

Broad cloth, kersies, and perpetuanos I think will prove the best
comodetie for Japon, and redds and stamettes and blacks best cullers,
and, yf they sell not at an instant, yet tyme will vent all. Som other
mingled cullers, as cullor du roy or such lyke, will not doe amis; but
noe more yello nor straw culler, for that proveth the worst culler of
all.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

And tuching that which I wrot your Wors. in my last letters sent from
Nangasaque in the junck _Godspeed_, how that a nobellmans men of this
place (called Semi Dono) fell a quarreling with Mr. Edmond Sayer and
others, whereupon the King of Firando banished both them and Mr.
Sayer, yet now all is revoked per the kinges order and Mr. Sayer
cleared and the others recalled. And soe I leave your Wors. with your
affares to the holy protection of thallmightie, resting alwais

             Your Wors. most humble servant at comande,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the Right Worll. the Governour, Deputie
    Comitties, and generallty of the
    East India Company deliver in London.
    By Capt. Martyn Pring in the
    _Royall James_, whome God preserve.

     [174] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. vii, no. 911.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[175]                    324

                      Firando in Japon, the 20th of January, 1620[1].


Right worll. Ser and Serrs,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

I am now enformed by a messenger we sent into China that the ould
Emperour hath resigned the government unto one of his sonns; and that
the new Emperour hath granted our nation trade into China for two
shipps a yeare, and the place apointed near to Fuckchew, and that ther
wanted but the fermes of ij vizroys of ij provinces to conferme it;
and that the _goshon_ or passport will be sent us the next moonson,
and had byn heare before now, had it not byn letted per the wars of
Tartaria. Thus much our China frendes tell me, and I hope it will
prove true.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

                Your Wors. humble servant at command,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

     [175] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. vii, no. 924.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[176]

                       Firando in Japon, the 30th of September, 1621.


Right worll. Ser and Sers,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The 29th of June last our whole fleete of 9 shipps, English and Duch,
arived in saffetie from the Manillias, very few of the men being dead,
and have taken and pillaged 5 junckes, the Duch using much crueltie in
killing many Chinas after they hadd rendered them selves, and many
more had [byn] kild yf the English had not prevented them.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The Duch did abuse our men in the Manillias, and, had it not byn
prevented by som, they had gon together by the eares, to the              325
endangering or losse of the whole fleete, as I make acco. others will
write at lardg to your Wors. therof. And now this yeare, per order of
the Councell of Defence from Jaccatra, the same fleet proceadeth
againe on the like voyage, the Hollanders being admerall this yeare,
as the English were the last; only the Hollanders send away the shipp
_Swan_ and put an other shipp called the _Muyon_ in her place, and the
English joyne the shipp _Pepercorne_ to the fleet, to make them up x
seale in all, and have determened that within these xv daies the
_Pepercorne_ and _Muyon_ shall departe from hence, to lie upon the
coast of China in a certen hight, to keepe back the China junckes
which we are enformed will departe for the Manillias with the first of
the monson, which yf they doe, of necessitie our 2 shipps will meete
with them. And the rest of the fleete, being 8 seale, will follow
after, and are to departe from hence the 1th of December, new stile.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Also may it please your Wors. to understand that, by meanes of the
governor of Nangasaque, Gonrok Dono, whoe taketh the Spaniardes and
Portingals partes against us, with all the merchantes of that place,
Miaco, and Edo, geving the Emperour to understand that both we and the
Hollanders are pirates and theevs and live upon nothing but the spoile
of the Chinas and others, which is the utter overthrow of the trade in
Japon, noe one daring to com hither for feare of us. By which reportes
themperour and his councell are much moved against us, as the King of
Firando doth tell us, whoe is newly retorned from the Emperours court,
where he hath married the Emperours kinswoaman, which hath brought hym
into greate creddit, and he is the only stay now which we have in
Japon. And by his order the Hollandes capt., Leonard Camps, and my
selfe are apointed to goe to Edo with the presentes to themperour and
his councell, to procure redresse, yf we may, and prevent our enemies     326
proceadinges. For the Emperour hath sent downe order that we shall
carry out noe Japons to man our shiping, nether make nor carry out any
ordinance, gunpowder, shott, guns, pikes, _langanattes_, _cattans_,
nor any other warlike munition. And it was reported we should carry
out nether rise, bred, nor wine, nor flesh; but that is not yet donne.
But the other is procleamed, and waiters apointed to look out night
and day that noe forbidden matters be convaid abord our shipps. Soe
that, yf we get noe redresse for these matters, it is noe abiding for
us in Japon, and better to know it at first then last what we may
trust unto.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

And, as I understand by Capt. Robt. Adames, admerall the last yeare of
the fleete of defence, that in the last voyage the yeare past to the
Manillas the Hollanders did much abuse our English men, and Wm.
Johnson vizadmerall was cheefe occation therof. Soe that they had like
to have gon together by the eares in the Manillias, to the totall
distraction of both fleetes, the enemie being so neare, yet by the
discretion of som it was pacefied; as I make acco. Capt. Adames hath
advized your Wors. at large, he being now apointed vizadmerall, much
against his will, by the Councell of Defence at Jaccatra, he dowbting
that yf the last yeare, when he was admerall, they feared not to doe
soe, that, now themselves are admerall, they will doe worse. And
herinclozed I send your Wors. a copie of a letter which I receved from
Molucas in a shipp of the Hollanders, sent from Mr. Wm. Nicolles,
agent, wherin your Wors. may see the proceadinges of the Hollanders in
those partes, as I make acco. he hath advized therof hym selfe. Truly
their proceadinges every wheare are allmost intolerable, and they are
generally hated thorowout all the Indies, and we much the worse
thought of now we are joyned with them.

Yt is very certen that with little danger our fleet of defence may        327
take and sack Amacon in China, which is inhabeted by Portingales. For
the towne is not fortefied with walls; nether will the King of China
suffer them to doe it, nor to make any fortifecations, nor mount noe
ordinance upon any plotforme; and 3/4 partes of the inhabetantes are
Chinas. And we are credably enformed that, these 2 last yeares, when
they did see but 2 or 3 of our shipp within sight of the place, they
weare all ready to run out of the towne, as I have advized the
Precedent and Councell of Defence at Jaccatra; and, had but 2 small
shipps, as the _Bull_ and _Pepercorne_, entred this yeare, they might
easely have burnt and taken 17 seale of galliotas which weare at an
ancor, amongst which weare the 6 galliotas which came into Japon,
being then full laden; and, had they taken this fleet, the Portingales
hadd byn utterly undon, as they them selves confesse, and, that towne
being taken, all the Portingalles trade in these partes of the world
is quite spoiled, both for Manillias, Malacca, Goa, and else wheare.
And the King of China would gladly be ridd of their neighbourhood, as
our frendes which procure our entry for trade into China tell me, and
doe say that he wished that we could drive them from thence. But this
yeare there is 3 kings of China dead, the father and his two sonns,
the wives of the two bretheren procuring the poisoning of them both.
Soe that now a yong man of 14 or 15 yeares ould is com to be king,
being the sonne of one of the deceased brothers; which is a stay unto
our proceadinges to get trade into China, for that new petision must
be made, and our joyning with the Hollanders to take China juncks is
ill thought of. But the barbarousnesse of the Hollanders at Manillias
the last yeare is much; for, after they had taken the China junkes and
that the pore men had rendred them selves, the Hollandars did cut many
of them in peeces and cast many others into the sea; wherof our men
saved and took many of them up into our shipps; and much more             328
distrucktion had byn made of them, had not Capt. Adames, the admerall,
prevented it.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Notwithstanding the previleges which we and the Hollanders have from
themperours of Japon, that the Japons shall not execute any justice
upon our people, yet this yeare the justis of this place (but it was
in the abcense of the king) did cut offe the heades of ij Hollanders
which, being drunke, did brable with the Japons and drue out their
knives, as their custam is, and gave a skram or 2 to som Japons, one
being a souldier, yet kild noe man; and yet the Hollanders were haled
out into the filds and their heads cut offe and sent home to the
Hollands howse, which they refuced to receve, desiring them to leave
them with the bodies, which they did, and soe left them in the filds
to be eaten by crowes and dogges; which they had byn, had not som
Englishmen buried them.

And as som of our men goe along the streetes, the Japons kindly call
them in and geve them wine and whores till they be drunk, and then
stripp them of all they have (som of them stark naked) and soe turne
them out of dores. And som they keepe presoners, forging debtes upon
them, which som of our men sweare they owe not; yet it is noe
beleeving of all, for som of our men are bad enough; yet out of dowbt
the abuse is greate and never seene till the last yeare and this. For
the king hath (by our procurement) from the first made an edect that
the Japons should not trust our men without paying money for what they
tooke; for it is an ordenary course for som of our men to leave the
shipps and lie ashore in secret a wick, a fortnight, yea a month som
of them, and in the end cause their hostes to keepe them presoners,
telling us it is by force, yet confesse the debt som of 5, others of
10, 20, and 30 _taies_ per man which they owe, desiring it may be paid
and put upon their wages. Which course of theirs I withstand in all I
may, and make many set free without payment, which they murmur at as a    329
disgrance and discredett to them, swearing, woundes and blood, your
Wors. are indebted to them in farr greater somms and yet they cannot
be masters of their owne; soe that the trowble I have with them heare
is much. Nether can ther comanders curb them, they rise in such greate
multetudes, as for example I advised your Wors. the last yeare, and
laid violent handes on the admerall, Capt. Adames; and this yeare the
_Bulls_ company and most parte of the _Moones_ mutened, and
all the rest promised them to doe the like, but were prevented, for
that som of these weare taken and punished, which caused the others to
feare.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

And for the shipp called the English _Hope_ (for the Hollanders
have one of the same name) is ether cast away or else the company have
revolted and run away with the shipp and kild the master or else carid
hym away with them perforce, for every on thinketh that the master,
Mr. Carnaby, would never consent thereunto; but they suspect one
Thorneton and the chirurgion, with other mutenose persons in her, for
that this Thornton hath a brother which they say is a piratt and
entertayned per the Duke of Florence. Soe they imagin, after they have
made what purchase they may, that they will direct their course
thither with the shipp. This is the opinion of the cheefe in our
fleete.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

             Your Wors. most humble servant at comand,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the Honorble. Sr. Thomas Smith,
    Knight, Governor of the East India
    Company, and to the Right Worll.
    the Comittys deliver in London. Per
    way of Jaccatra, in shipp _Swan_.

     [176] _Ibid._, vol. viii, no. 995.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[177]                    330

                          Firando in Japon, the 4th of October, 1621.


Right worll. Ser and Sers,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

As yet Gonrok Dono is not come to Firando, and God knoweth when he
will; for, as it is said, he stayeth at Nangasaque to put to death
many Japon Christians for haboring of papist pristes secretly, and
till he com the King of this place will not suffer us to goe to the
Emperour with our presentes, which maketh us stand in dowbt whether he
secretly take part with Gonrok Dono and the papistes our enemies
against us and stayeth us of purpose till the Spaniardes and
Portingales have preveled against us at Emperours court. For the
kinges mother is a papist Christian, and the king hym selfe and all
his bretheren are christened. This maketh us to stand in dowbt of the
worst. Yet, yf it be trew, we canot remedy it; for we canot departe
from hence without the kinges leave and one of his men to goe with us,
nether dare any bark carry us away without his comition. Soe that God
He knoweth what our affares in these partes will com to in the end.
And that which maketh me more afeard then all the rest is the
unreasonablenesse and unrulynesse of our owne people, which I know not
how it will be amended, as I have spoaken more at lardge in my other
letter, and yet it is every day lyke to be worse then other for ought
I can see. God of His goodnesse send me into a place where I may have
to doe in merchantes affares and not to meddell with men of warr, yf
all be as unruly as these are. And soe, ceasing from trowbling            331
your Wors. any ferther, I rest, as allwaies,

             Your Wors. most humble servant at comand,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the Right Honored Knight, Sr. Thomas
    Smith, Governor of the East India
    Company, and to the Right Worll. the
    Comittis deliver in London. Per the
    shipp _Swan_, per way of Jaccatra.

     [177] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. viii, no. 997.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[178]

                        Firando in Japon, the 7th of September, 1622.


Right worll. Ser and Sers,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

Our whole Manillia fleete of x seale, viz. 5 English and 5 Duch, are
saffely retorned to this port of Firando, having made a farr rucher
voyage this yeare then they did the last, as apereth per the coppie of
the cargezon sent hereinclozed, the like being sent to Jaccatra to the
precedent.

Since which tyme I have receved 2 letters from Mr. Fursland, the
precedent, dated in Jaccatra the 26th of March and 25th of August last
past, wherein he and his councell advized me and the rest of the
merchantes in the factory to leave affe our consortshipp of the fleet
of defence with the Hollanders, and to send our 5 shipps for Jaccatra
with as much speed as conveniently we could; and that the _Palsgrove_
and _Moone_ should tuch at Jamby to take in their lading of peper; the
_Pepercorne_ to stay upon the coast of China som tyme to look out
according to their former comition geven; and the _Elizabeth_ and
_Bull_ to com directly from hence for Jaccatra and bring away all the
remeander left in Japon in money or merchandiz, except a cargezon of
five thousand _taies_ to be left in the handes of Mr. Jno. Osterwick,     332
with one man for a second, and a therd for an assistant, as should be
thought fitting; and that my selfe, Mr. Wm. Eaton, and Edmond Sayer
should com alonge in the said shipps for Jaccatra, for lessenyng
charges in the factory. Which directions, God willing, shall be
followed soe neare as we can.

The Hollanders this yeare sent a new fleet of shipps of 14 or 15
seale, greate and small, to have taken Amacan; but they had the
repulse with the losse, as som say, of 300, and others say 500 men,
and 4 of their shipps burned; the king of China now permitting the
Portingales to fortefie Amacon, which he would never condecend unto
till now, and hath geven order to the vizroy of Canton to assist them
with 100,000 men against the Hollanders, yf need require. There was 4
of our 10 shipps of the fleete of defence, 2 English and 2 Hollanders,
plying up and downe before Amacon before the Hollandes fleete of 15
seale arived there. The English shipps were the _Palsgrove_ and the
_Bull_, whoe, in passing by, hailed them with a noes of trumpetes, but
the Dutch made them noe answer nether by word of mouth nor otherwaies,
but passed in by them with silence; which at first made them stand in
dowbt whether they were frendes or noe. But the Hollanders made
accompt to have taken the towne at first onset without the helpe of
our shiping or men, and therefore vouchsafed not to speake to them;
yet fayled of their purpose, but since have fortefied them selves in
an iland neare to Isla Fermosa called Isla de Piscadores, where they
report is a very good harbour and water enough for the greatest shipps
in the worlde.

The Hollanders have geven it out to the Chinas that they are
Englishmen, only to bring our nation in disgrace; of the which our
China frendes in Japon have adviz and have retorned answer per 2 or 3
severall conveances to the contrary, and that we had two English
shipps before Amacon, when the Hollanders gave the attempt against the
place, but went for Japon without assisting them at all. And the          333
Hollanders in Japon doe geve it out heare that we are halves with them
in the new fortification of Piscadores, of the which our precedent
writeth me to the contrary. I am afeard that their attempt against
Amacon will cause both them and us to be driven out of Japon, for it
hath overthrowne the China trade in these partes. Yet our China
frendes still tell us we may have trade into China, yf we will, it
being granted allready; but by meanes of the warrs of the Tartar
against them and the death of 3 kinges of China in one or 2 yeares is
the cause we have not entred before now; but, for the Hollanders, he
will never suffer them to enter upon any conditions whatsoever.

Mr. Osterwick and my selfe, with 2 of the cheefe of the Hollandes
factory, were at Edo after the departure of our shipps the last yeare,
with presentes for themperour and his councell, hoping to have gott
lycense to have carid out men and munition as in tyme past, but could
get nothing but feare wordes for the space of 3 months we were forced
to stay at Edo before we could gett our dispach, they telling us in
the end they could conclude nothing untill the arivall of the King of
Firando, whome they had sent for, but at his coming they would take
such order about that which we demanded, as also about the delivering
the friggates goods, as should be to both our contentes. And, as we
retorned, we mett the King of Firando in the way, whoe made us many
faire promisses. Yet now order is com from Edo that themperour will
have all the priz goodes of the friggat for hym selfe, leving the
rotten hull for us and the Hollanders, and, although we have made what
resistance we could, yet are we constrayned to deliver it to them,
will we or nill we; and, that which is more, they constrayne us to way
over all the goodes to them, we being enformed they will make plito
against us for much more matters then ever we receved and beleeve the
lying reportes of our enemies whoe duble all. And for carying out         334
men and munition as in tyme past, that such a mighty prince as
themperour of Japon is, having once passed his word to the contrary,
would not alter it now at the demand of such people as we are. And
this is the best we can find now in Japon, and I dowbt wilbe every day
worse then other.

The 2 fryres or semenary pristes which came in the friggat from
Manillia are both rosted to death at Nangasaque, with Yoshen Dies,
capt. of the friggat, whoe was a Japon, put to death with the frires
Spaniardes; and 12 other Japons which were marrenars in the friggat
were beheaded in their sight, before the other 3 were executed. As
alsoe, since that tyme, above xij other Spanish and Portingall fryres
and Jesuistes have byn rosted to death at Nangasaque, and above a
hundred Japons put to death by fire and sword, both men, woamen, and
children, for entertayning and harboring of them.

Also, now of late, a China junck arived at Shaxma in Japon, which came
from Caggalion, in the Manillias, and brought 4 Spaniardes or
Portingales in her for passingers, they telling the Chinas they were
merchantes, but are fownd to be pristes and sent presoners to
Nangasaque, where it is thought they shalbe rosted to death as the
former have byn, and the China marenars in danger all to lose their
lives, and the goodes seazed upon, which did all belong to Andrea
Dittis, the China Capt. (our frend), whoe is forced to send his sonne
to the court with great presentes to save his goodes, yf it be
possible.

The capt. more or major of the Portingall gallion or adventures which
com from Amacon to Nangasaque, called Jeronimo de Figeredo Caravallo,
with Lues Martin, Jorge Bastian, and Jarvasias Garçis, Portugezes, and
Harnando Ximenes, a Spaniard, whoe was _jurebasso_ in tyms past at
Bantam, are brought in question for going about to steale a fryer or
padre from the Hollands howse the last yeare, and, allthough the padre    335
was brought back (which was one of them which was rosted), yet are
they all empresoned and condemned and all their goodes confiscat, and
looke howrly when they shall be executed. And one of the Hollandes
_jurebassos_ and a scrivano, being Japons, with the master of the bark
which carid hym away, his wife and children, all executed; this
Emperour, Shongo Samma, being such a mortall enemie to the name of a
Christian, espetially of papisticall Christians. And heretofore, when
I was at the court at Edo, the Emperours councell did aske me severall
tymes whether I were a Christian or our English nation soe; which I
tould hym yea; and, in the end, askinge me soe often, I tould them
they might perceve per the letters the Kinges Matie. of England sent
to themperour of Japon whether we were Christians or noe, the Kinges
Matie. writing hymselfe defender of the Christian faith. And then they
asked me whether there were any difference betwixt our religion and
the Spanish; unto which I answered yea, for that we held nothing of
the pope of Roome, but next and emediately under God from our kinge:
which it seemed in some sort to geve them content.

We and the Hollanders have had much a doe in standing out for not
delivring the priz goodes of the friggat, it belonging to our prince
and cuntrey, as taken from their enemies. But that would not serve,
the _tono_ or cheefe justis of Firando telling us that, yf we would
not leave it by feare meanes, they would take it whether we would or
noe, and that yf we had not absolutely proved the Portingalls to be
padres, that themperour ment to have put Capt. Leonard Camps and me to
death and to have sezed on all we had in the cuntrey, and, yf any
resistance had byn made, to have burned all our shiping and put us all
to the sword. God send us well out of Japon, for I dowbt it wilbe
every day worse then other.

Yt is also said the Emperour will banish all Spaniardes and Portingall    336
howseholders out of Japon, and suffer non to stay but such as com and
goe in their shiping, to prevent entertayning of padres. And soe let
this suffice for the present state of Japon.

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

And soe I leave your Wors. with your affares to the holy protection of
thallmightie, resting

             Your Wors. most humble servant at comand,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

This letter was first sent per the _Trow_, a Hollandes shipp, but,
shee and others being retorned back per stormy wether, I send it now
per the _Bull_.

                        Firando in Japon, the 14th of November, 1622.

May it please your Wors. that the 9th of September last past there
departed 5 Hollandes shipps from hence, greate and small, 4 of them
for Isla de Piscadores with provition, and one directly for Jaccatra,
which was the _Trow_. But, by means of extremety of wether, 4 of them
retorned back to Firando the 19th of September, viz. the _Bantam_, the
_Trow_, the _Muoien_, the _Tortola_: all in greate extremety, mastes
cutt overbord, and much provition throwne into the sea. And the other
penisse called the _Santa Croix_, wherein were above 30 men, retorned
not back; soe they think she is cast away. As alsoe, in the same
storme, the Hollanders had other 2 shipps cast away in the roade of
Cochie at Firando, the one called the _Moone_, a shipp of 7 or 800
tonns, and the other, the _Hownd_, an English shipp in tymes past.

The xvijth of October the _Palsgrove_ and _Pepercorne_ put to sea on
their pretended voyages, as I formerly nomenated, and 2 Duch shipps,
the _Trow_ and the _Harlam_, went out with them; and 3 other Holland
shipps went from hence after them the xxvjth ditto, viz. the _Bantam_,
_Muoyen_, and _Tortolla_, to tuch all at Piscadores, to discharge         337
tymber and plankes which they carry to fortefie themselves.

The _Moone_ is now ready to put to sea to follow the _Palsgrove_ to
Jamby; and we dispach away the _Bull_ to goe in company with her; but
send nether money nor goodes in the _Moone_, nether sent we any in the
_Palsgrove_, the precedent Mr. Fursland comanding the contrary in his
letters from Jaccatra; but we sent a cargezon of money and merchandiz
in the _Bull_, amonting to 70,342 _ta._ 8 _m._ 9 _co._, as yow may see
per coppie of the invoiz.

The _Elizabeth_ we will dispach away as sowne as we can recover in
money, for we have sould all our silk and mantas, but noe money
receved but that which goeth in the _Bull_; soe I dowbt I shall be
constrayned to stay here till the next monson, to sett matters right.
And Edmond Sayer and Ric. Hudson are at this instant ready to departe
towardes Edo with our presentes for themperour and his Councell, as
the Hollanders are the like, and our frendes geve us councell not to
stay behind them. And Mr. Joseph Cockram goeth in the _Bull_ for
Jaccatra. Soe Mr. Jno. Osterwick and my selfe of necessety must stay
heare to gett in monies to dispach away the _Elizabeth_, as I think
Mr. Eaton must doe the like; for it is noe staying a shipp of such
greate charges as she is any long tyme upon dowbtfull occations.

I know I need not to adviz of the unrulynesse of many of our marrenars
and sealers, and som of them not of the meanest sort, whoe daylie lie
ashore att tipling howses, wasting their goodes and geving bad
insample to others to doe the like; soe that of force many carpentars
and others have byn hired to doe the shipps busynes, whiles they did
lie loyteringe. I need not to name them, but refer it to the cheefe
comanders them selves.

I have delivered more monies of the deceased Capt. Wm. Adams unto the
purcers of the _Moone_, _Bull_, and _Elizabeth_, to the some of one
hundred powndes str., to pay two hundred in England to his widdow         338
Mrs. Mary Adams and her doughter in halves; as the other 100_l._ I
sent in the _Royall James_ was the like. And soe I leave your Wor.
with your affares to the holy protection of thallmighty, resting
allwais

               Your Wors. humble servant at command,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the Right Honored Knight, Sr. Thomas
    Smith, Governor, and the Right Worll.
    the Committies of the East India Company,
    deliver in London. Per the shipp
    _Bull_, whome God preserve.

     [178] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. ix, no. 1078.

                        -------------------


              RICHARD COCKS TO THE E. I. COMPANY.[179]

                        Firando in Japon, the 31th of December, 1622.


Right worll. Ser and Sers,--

                   *     *     *     *     *     *

The Hollanders have this yeare sould greate store of broad cloth,
stamettes, blacks, and other cullars, non being left to sell, and at
20 _tais_ and some above per _tattamy_, and have written for more to
Jaccatra to be sent in the next shipp which cometh; as I have donne
the like to the precedent, yf any be there to send it. The reason of
venting broadcloth is the rumor of warrs very likely to have ensued in
Japon, and God knoweth what will com of it; for, since the writing of
my last, there is a greate conspirasie discoverd against the person of
the Emperour Shonga Samma by 8 or 9 of the greatest and powrfullest
princes in Japon, and is thought many others have a hand in it, and
his owne bretheren and nearest kinsmen amongst the rest, and the king
of this place not free. Soe that it is thought the adverse partie is      339
soe stronge that themperour dare not meddell with them, but will wink
at the matter and make peace with them.

The Hollanders have sent greate store of monies and provition to their
fortefication at Piscadores, thinking to get trade with the Chinas by
one meanes or other; which I am perswaded will not fall out to their
exspectation, except they take the China junckes which trade to Isla
Fermosa, called by them Taccasanga, which is within sight of the
Piscadores. And the Emperour of Japon hath geven out his passe or
_goshon_ to the Chinas to trade to Taccasanga, and soe from thence
into Japon; soe, yf they be medled withall, their is noe staying in
Japon for them which take them. For the 10th ultimo Edmond Sayer, with
Ric. Hudson and 2 Hollanders, went from hence towardes Edo with
presentes to themperour and his Councell; and we have adviz from them
of their arivall at Miaco, and that all men speake ill of them and cry
out against them. Soe God knoweth whether our presentes will be
receved or noe; but we deliver ours apart and doe mentayne we have
nothing to doe with them in their plantation at Piscadores. Of which I
thought good to adviz your Wors.

Silk at present is not worth soe much as it was at the arivall of our
fleete, yet we have made away most of ours which rested, the presentes
being geven out, and trusted it out till the next monson; as the
Hollanders have donne the like.

And our frend Andrea Dittis, the China Capt., still mentayneth that
our nation may have trade into China, yf they will, but not the
Hollanders; which God grant may once take effect.

I have not what else to adviz your Wors. of, matters standing as they
doe; but hope the next monson to com towardes England, God sparinge me
liffe and health, and soe leave your Wors. with your affares to the       340
holy protection of thallmighty, resting

             Your Wors. most humble servant at comand,

                                                          RIC. COCKS.

  To the Right Honored Knight, Sr. Thomas
    Smith, Governour of the East India
    Company, and to the Right Worll. the
    Committies, deliver in London. Per
    the shipp _Elizabeth_, whome God preserve.
    Sent per way of Jaccatra.

     [179] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. ix, no. 1093.

                        -------------------


           THE COUNCIL AT BATAVIA TO RICHARD COCKS.[180]

                        (_Copy._)


Mr. Cox and the rest,--

By the _Palsgrave_ and the rest of our shipps of defence, contrary to
our expectacon and expresse comission, instead of your personall
appeerance in this place, wee have received severall letters from your
selfe and the rest, which gives us no satisfaccion for the breach of
our comission, neither is therein conteyned any reason of validitie to
excuse your so greate disobediance. What mooved you hereunto wee knowe
not, but so many yeres should have had so much experience as to knowe
what it is to infringe his superiors comition, and certaine wee are
that you cannot answere this your transgretion, if wee should call you
and the rest soe stricktly to accompt as your neglect deserveth. But
wee will suppose that those your proceedinges were more through
ignorance then out of any setled purpose of contempt towardes us, and
will forbeare to censure you at present, in hoape of your conformetie
now at last to our second comission, which wee send heerewith by our
loving frend Mr. Joseph Cockram, whome wee have and doe appointe
cheefe marchant of the _Bull_ for the whole voyage. Which shipp wee       341
have nowe made reddy, with no small charge to our employers, purposely
to send her unto you, to bring awaye boath your selfe and the rest of
the factors, with all the Compa. estate remayning there in the
countrie, as more particulerly wee have declared in our comission to
Mr. Cockram and instructions delivered to him; heereby straightly
charging and comanding, in behalfe of the Honble. Companie our
masters, that, uppon sight heereof, you, Mr. Richard Cock, shall
deliver over into the handes and custody of Mr. Joseph Cockram all
such monnies, goods, debts, etc., as pertaine to the Honnorable
Compa., our imployers; and boath you, Mr. Richard Cock, Wm. Eaton,
Edmond Sayre, and John Osterwick, shall all and every of you come
awaye from thence uppon the shipp _Bull_ for Batavia; hereby charging
you and every of you to fulfill our saide order, as you will answere
the contrary at your perelles.

The debts which were standing out by your last letters we hope you
will have cleired and received them in before this shall come to your
hands, knowing the last yere that you are to come from thence. But, if
any such debts shalbe yett standing out, it concernes you that made
them [to receive them] in before the shipp come awaye from thence. The
China Nocheda hath two long deluded you through your owne simplicitie
to give creditt unto him. You have lived long enough in those parts to
be better experienced of the fraudulent practizes of those people,
and, although the prejudice which the Honnorable Compa. have suffered
by missing of such greate somes of monney so long, which you have
delivered unto him, cannot be recompenced by him, yet it will now be
respected and required that you procure all satisfaccon from him for
all he owes unto the Compa. The King of Firando his debt wee hoape you
have received, boath all somes of such moment as it behooves you to be
carefull and dilligent in the recovering in of them; and, in hoape        342
you will herein sattisfie our expectacon, wee desist further to incite
you in this matter.

Having cleered all busines and gotten the Companies estate aboard
their shipp, which wee desire may be with all speede convenient, you
are to take frendly leave of the king and such other officers as you
knowe to be meete, and to deliver over the Compa. howse and godownes
into the kings hands, to appoint some whome hee shall thincke fitting
to keepe the same for the Honnorable Compas. use, untill such tyme as
wee shall send theither againe to repossesse the same. And for all
such provitions as wee have given order unto Mr. Cockram to provide
for this place, you are to see them furnished in due tyme, that soe
the shipp may take the best season of the monsonn to come awaye from
thence.

Alsoe you are to furnish the shipp with all materialls needefull for
her tryming, and eache thinge according to our order given for the
perforemance of the busines, and lett the flesh that is to be provided
be salted in such a tyme as it may keepe to doe us service. If the
full quantetie cannot be provided in dew tyme, then furnish what you
cann, for wee will that no busines shall hinder the shipps and your
coming awaye from thence in dew tyme to performe her voyage unto this
port of Batavia.

And in case there shall be any debts of vallue standing out which
cannot be recovered before your lymitted tyme of coming from thence,
and that there be certaine hopes to recover in the saide debts
afterward, then you shall followe such order as wee have given Mr.
Cockram for the leaving of a mann there to recover such debts as
shalbe remayning and cannot be gotten in as aforesaid.

The China menn which you sent to refine the silver returne in this
shipp. They have refined only one chist of barr plate for triall, and
that wee finde so badly donn that we would not lett them proceede         343
any further. They are not suffitient to performe what they have
undertaken, for they spoile all they take in hand; so that what you
have agreed with them for is meerely cast awaye and lost to the
Honnorable Compa. Wee have payde them no wages heere, which you are to
take notice of and reccon with them there according as you can agree
with them.

Wee desire no more barr plate; wherefore the rest remayning, lett it
be in _soma_, _seda_, and _fabuck_ plate. But, if there be any such
dannger in bringing out the latter, wee desire not to stand to such an
adventure. The Dutch have greate quantities sent, yet make no such
dannger as you write of; wherefore, if you cannot gett it as securely
as they, wee must take such as may be procured without such hassarde.

Camphire which the Hollanders buy in such quanteties wee knowe no vend
for; yett you may provide twenty cases or tenn _peculs_, which may
serve for a triall both for England and Mu[su]l[i]pa[tam]; but any
greater quantitie then prementioned send not.

In this shipp we have laden a small parcell of camphire of Barouse,
being in all 60 _catts_. If the quantetie be over greate, you may
keepe it secrett and receive it ashore by small parcells, as you can
sell it. Wee would have sent more if wee had byn ascertined of its
vend there; but, acording to your former advices, this nowe sent may
be too much. What part of it you cannot sell bring back with you, or
leave it there with him that stays in the factory, if there be
occasion to leave a man there; the ordering whereof, with all other
busines, wee have referred to Mr. Cockram, as aforesaide.

We expect to have a reformacion in the lavish expences for the shipps
companie. It is the Honnorable Compa. expresse order that in any port,
where refreshing may be had good cheape, they shall not have allowance
of above foure flesh meales a weeke and three meales with salt fish       344
or such like to eate with their rice. This order you are to take
notice of and to perfoarme the same; neither may you feede the saylors
both aboard and ashore, which (as wee are informed) hath byn a common
costom with you, to the excescive charg of the Honnorable Companie,
our masters.

You write the pursers aught not to be allowed the foure per cento
which they bring to accompt for losse in monneys, and referr it to us
to abate it. This abatement you ought to have made there, knowing it
to be unreasonable, and should not send such matters unto us to decide
where the pursers want no excuses for themselfes, and wee cannot
contradict them but only with your barr (wee cannot see you [how ?]
they can loose so much), which is no suffitient reason. Wherefore with
this purser of the _Bull_ now better examine that busines, and,
finding it an abuse by the pursers, abate it uppon Mr. Watts accompt;
and, at your arivall heere, wee will take the like course with the
rest or so many of them as are heere remayning.

And because the last yere, to serve your owne turne, you made what
construction you pleased of our comission for your coming from thence,
wee doe nowe iterate our comission in the conclusion of our letter,
least, having redd itt in the former part thereof, you should forgett
it before you come to thend. Wee will and comaund in the name and
behalfe of the Honnorable Compa. of Marchants of London trading [to]
East India, our masters, that you, Mr. Richard Cock, William Eaton,
Edmond Sayre, and John Osterwick, shall deliver over into the hands of
Mr. Joseph Cockram all monneys, goods, and debts perteyning to the
Honnorable Compa. aforesayde, and shall all and every of you
aforenamed come away from Japon in the shipp _Bull_ for this port of
Battavia. Which our order wee require you to performe, as you will
answere the contrary at your perill. And soe, hoping of your
conformitie unto the premises, wee conclude with our comendations         345
unto you, and committ you with your affayres to Gods direction.

                        Your loving frends,

                                                   RICHARD FURSLAND.
                                                   THOMAS BROCKENDON.
                                                   AUG. SPALDING.

  Batavia, le 22th of May, Ao. 1623.

     [180] British Museum. _Cotton Charter_, iii. 13, f. 43.

                        -------------------


  _Coppie of a letter to_ FEGENO CAMME, _the Kinge or Govr. of Ferando
    in Japon, sent by our jurobasso_, COE JUAN, _to the Emperours
    courte now at Meacoe_.[181]


Maye yt please your Highnes, etc.

The 19th instante heare aryved one of our Honnourable Companies shipps
from Batavia uppon the coaste, by whome wee have rec. letters from the
Honnourable our Gennerall and Councell of India their resident,
whearby wee are strictlie charged and commaunded to recover in all
such debtes as wee have abroad, and for a tyme to disolve and leave
this factorie and to come awaye, everie of us, uppon this shipp with
the first of the moonesone, without any excuse or hinderance
theirunto. The which commaund from our said Gennerall wee maye not,
neither to our powers will, any waye infringe, but doe resolve by the
prime of November next to departe hence; whearof wee have thought
fittinge in tyme to acquainte your Highnes.

The reasonns endusinge our Gennerall heareunto are many; yet not
proceedinge out of any unkinde usage heare in his Maties. dominions,
but rather in respect of theise followeinge, viz.:--

The dannger of the seas betweene this and Batavia, haveinge loste
within this three yeares two greate and rich shipps bound for this
place. Alsoe the smale hopes wee have of procuring trade into China,      346
which hetherto our Honnourable Companie have with greate charges
endeavoured to procure, and partelie uppon those hopes have contynewed
theire factorie heare thus longe tyme at no smale expence, hopeinge of
better profight then thefect hath prodused. And now, lastlie, the
losse of one of our Honnourable Companies shipps in her voyadge from
England, whoe was richlie laden with comodities of our cuntrie, such
as, for the moste parte, have beine vendible heare in Japon; by which
meanes wee reste alltogeather unprovided of goods to supplie this
factorie, and theirfore not held requisite or entended longer to be
contynewed, unless wee could see better hopes to profight. Yet,
notwithstandinge, if the next yeare shall produce any better
encouradgement, maye then returne againe. Uppon which hopes and good
expectation wee entend not to sell or put off our howses and godonns;
but, accordinge to our Genneralls order, to leave them to your
Highnes, intreateinge they may be kepte for us and repocessed by us,
if wee shall returne hither againe. Of which your Highnes shall have
due advice everie yeare.

Wee have likewise written heareof unto the Lords of his Maties.
Councell, a coppie whearof wee send your Highnes heare inclosed
togeither with the princepall, which, if you finde requesite, maye
please to cause to be delivered.

And thus, intreatinge to excuse the sendinge this messenger and not
comeinge our selves in respect of our short tyme of staye and not
being furnished with matterialls needfull to present his Maties.
Councell of Japon, we humbly take our leaves, ever restinge

                  Your Highnes servants to comand,

                                                      JOSEPH COCKRAM.
                                                      RICHARD COCKS.

  English Factory, Ferando in Japon,
    the 26th Julie, anno 1623.

     [181] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. x, no. 1115.

                        -------------------


  _Coppie of a consultation or letters to the Lords of his Maties.        347
    Councell of Japon, sent by our jurobasso_, COE JUAN, _to the
    Emperours courte at Meacoe for the tyme beinge_.[182]


Whearas, with the free consente and licence of his Matie. the Emperour
of Japon and many favours of you, the Lords of his Majesties Councell,
wee have thus longe contynewed our factorie heare in his Maties.
domynions in Ferando without any molestation or injury offred by any
of his Maties. subjects, wee are theirfore in all humble mannor bound
to acknowledg and render all due obedient thanks for the same. And
beinge now by our Gennerall and Councell of India called from hence,
with order for a tyme to disolve this factorie and come all awaye for
Batavia uppon the shipp now aryved and expreslie sent to that purpose,
wee have thought fittinge hearof to acquainte your Honnours, that, as
wee had firste admittance to settle a factorie heare and to remaine in
his Majesties cuntry, soe likewise wee maye [have] the like favour now
for our departure.

The reasonns moveinge heareunto are larglie expressed in our letter to
the Governour of this place, Fegeno Camme, from whome wee doe
acknowledge to have receaved many curtesies. Wee would our selves have
beine the messengers hearof, but that our occasions are more urgent
heare, the tyme of our staye beinge but shorte for cleeringe our
selves out of this cuntry; and theirfore doe humbly crave your
Honnours pardon, and shall ever remaine obliged to your Lordshipps,
and reste

                  Your Lordpps. servants to comd.,

                                                      JOSEPH COCKRAM.
                                                      RICHARD COCKS.

  English Factory, Ferando in Japon,
    the 26th Julij, anno 1623.

     [182] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. x, no. 1115.

                        -------------------


  _Coppie of a letter to_ FEGENO CAMME, _the Kinge or Governour of        348
    Ferando, in Japon, sent by_ RICHARD HUDSON _to the Emperours
    courte at Meacoe_.[183]


Maye it please your Highnes,--

Our laste was of the 26th Julie paste, by our _jurobasso_, Coe Juan,
whome wee sent expreslie with letters unto your Highnes and the Lords
of his Majesties Councell of Japon, makeing knowne unto your
Lordshipps our order, reced. from the Honnourable our Genneral and
Councell in India, for disolveinge this factorie and comeinge all
awaye with the firste of the moonsone for Batavia; which, God
willinge, wee entend to performe with all convenientsie. And to this
end wee wrote our former letters unto your Highnes and the Lords of
his Majesties Councell, theirby craveinge our friendlie departure and
excusinge the not cominge our selves nor sendinge any English to take
our leaves, in respect of our urgent occasions. All which wee hoped
would have prevailed. But, contrarie to expectation, wee understand by
Tonomonsama, your Highnes brother, and others your nobillitie heare,
that it is found expedient, and by your Highnes required, that wee
send an Englishman in performeance of this busines, which wee well
hoped our _jurobasso_ mighte have effected. And nowe, seeinge yt
cannot be otherwise, wee doe now send the bearer hearof, Richard
Hudson, whoe carreth with him certaine small presents for his
Majesties Councell, beinge such as the tyme will aford and our
abillitie of meanes strech unto; humbly intreateinge your Highnes to
further the dispach of this messenger, that he maye returne in tyme to
further the dispach of this shipp in our departure.

Wee have alsoe delivered unto this bearer his Majesties _goshenn_,
which was grannted us for our free traficke heare in Japon, beinge        349
theirunto required by Tonomonsama and Naygensama, as doubtinge by them
yt would be demaunded to be delivered upp unto his Maties. Councell;
but, if convenience yt might be granted, wee would intreat the
contynewance of yt in our hands, or otherwise in your Highnes custody,
that, returninge againe, wee maye have the more freer entrance.

And thus, intreatinge your Highnes favourable assistance in theis our
occasions, wee conclude, hopeinge to see you heare before our
departure and take a friendlie farwell. In meane tyme we reste

                 Your Highnes servants to commaund,

                                                      JOSEPH COCKRAM.
                                                      RICHARD COCKS.

  English Factorie at Ferando in Japon,
    the 2th August, 1623.

     [183] India Office. _Original Correspondence_, vol. x, no. 1115.




                             THE END.




                               INDEX.                                     350
                                                                          351

  Abbot, Maurice, deputy E.I.C. ii. 116.

  Achinese. Join the Dutch against the Portuguese, i. 148, 150.

  Adams, Mrs. (in Japan). i. 172, 183, 184, 185, 193, 247, 284, 319;
    ii. 11, 53, 57, 74, 97, 138, 240, 252.

  Adams, Isaac, [? error for Joseph] son of Will. Adams. ii. 233.

  Adams, Joseph, son of Will. Adams. i. 183, 284; ii. 97, 233, 240, 252.

  Adams, Mary (in England), wife of Will. Adams. ii. 117, 205, 338.

  Adams, Capt. Robert. ii. 112, 114, 115, 119, 120, 121, 173, 174, 175,
    176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 199, 207, 212, 213, 219, 222,
    223, 224, 318, 326.

  Adams, Susanna, daughter of Will. Adams. ii. 97, 240, 252.

  Adams, William. _Passim_;
       engaged to the E. I. Company, ii. 258;
       voyage to Siam, i. 88;
       his estate in Japan, i. 181;
       accident to, i. 195;
       voyages to Cochinchina, i. 225, 243; ii. 23, 296;
       his wages, i. 234, 235; ii. 277;
       attacked at sea, i. 244;
       Cocks's opinion of him, ii. 263, 269;
       his influence with the Shoguns, ii. 277, 322;
       death and will, ii. 321;
       goshons belonging to his children, ii. 126-129, 131;
       child at Firando, ii. 143, 156;
       his children, ii. 233, 245, 253;
       goods, ii. 189, 222, 233, 337.

  Adrian, Dutchman. i. 182; ii, 269.

  _Advice_, ship. i. 151, 222, 223, 226, 231, 233, 289, 291, 292, 293,
    294, 295, 330, 336, 342, 343, 348; ii. 15, 16, 40, 54, 61, 279.

  Aishima, or Anushma, Island. i. 142; ii. 70.

  Akasawa. ii. 79, 98.

  Albartus, Capt., Dutchman. i. 25, 158, 189, 205, 234, 239, 240, 264,
    275, 298, 306, 330, 339, 344; ii. 7, 24, 25, 62, 125, 133, 136, 137,
    138, 179, 197, 206.

  Ale, Bartholomew, of the _Palsgrave_. ii. 175.

  Alexander, Scotchman in the Dutch service. ii. 69.

  Alferis, The two. i. 147, 148.

  Alferis, _tuerto_. i. 43, 146; ii. 130.

  Amida, saint of China. Monastery at Yedo. ii. 88.

  _Amsterdam_, Dutch ship. ii. 189, 191.

  Amy, bongew of Cochinchina. i. 140.

  Ando Tushma Dono, nobleman. i. 171, 172.

  Andrea, host at Nagasaki. i. 28, 41, 42, 43.

  Andrea, Will. Adams's Japanese brother-in-law. i. 39, 166, 167, 183,
    192, 284; ii. 95, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 138, 244, 252, 253.

  Andrea, boatswain. ii. 167.

  _Angel_, Dutch ship. ii. 304.

  _Ankewsen_, Dutch ship. i. 36, 82, 98, 113.

  Anthony, servant. i. 71.

  Anthony, King of Firando's caffro. i. 125, 129, 334; ii. 59.

  Anthony, Biscayan. i. 238; ii. 51.

  Antonison, Lucas. i. 8, 16, 23, 64; ii. 54.

  Antony, Thomas. ii. 117.

  Apollonario, Franciscan. i. 6, 238, 335.

  Arai. i. 163, 196; ii. 98, 232, 255.

  Arima. i. 15;
       Christianity in, i. 173;
       rescue of a friar, i. 335;
       troops for, ii. 266.

  Arima, King of. ii. 162, 163, 164, 166, 167.

  Asakusa, near Yedo. Temple at, ii. 241.

  Asberry, ----, of the _Bull_. ii. 118.

  Ashiya. ii. 107;
       fire at, ii. 108.

  Atkinson, Richard. i. 229.

  _Attendance_, English ship taken by the Dutch. ii. 303, 304, 316.

  Ava, King of. Conquests by, i. 17.

  Avery, John, purser's mate of the _Elizabeth_. ii. 179.

  Awoe harbour. ii. 108.


  Badworth, ----. ii. 113.

  Ball, George, in Bantam. i. 16, 229, 290, 331; ii. 9, 16, 67, 312.

  Balle, the King of Firando's dog. i. 247.

  Ballok, Dutchman. ii. 199.

  Bantam. Ships trading with, i. 228, 233, 265; ii. 133.

  _Bantam_, Dutch ship. ii. 173, 174, 175, 223, 304, 336.

  _Bantam, New_, Dutch ship. ii. 319.

  Barker, John. ii. 116.

  Barker, William, of the _Peppercorn_. ii. 198.

  Barkhout, Capt. i. 298, 335, 336, 339; ii. 7, 14, 15, 40, 42, 56, 62.

  Barnardo, Capt. ii. 24, 92.

  Barns, ----. ii. 213.

  Barreda, Gil de la. i. 147.

  Bastian, Jorge. ii. 334.

  Bates, Ed., of the _Palsgrave_. ii. 175.

  Baylie, John, merchant. Dies in Japan, i. 145, 150, 154, 189, 193;
    ii. 279.

  Beamont, John, in Bantam. i. 48, 114; ii. 116.

  Beedam, ----, of the _Elizabeth_. ii. 198.

  Benita, or Bonita, Pascual, of Nagasaki. i. 126, 146, 150; ii. 14,
    145, 147, 171, 172, 180.

  Bicho, or Tushma, servant-boy. i. 102, 230; ii. 1, 33, 35.

  Bingana Tomo. i. 203, 212, 329; ii. 72, 106, 107, 229, 302.

  Bizen. ii. 106.

  Blackcolles, Henry, of the _Thomas_. i. 218.

  Blancard, Abraham, Dutch surgeon. ii. 315.

  Bogens, or Bugins, Nicholas, merchant. ii. 178, 179, 181, 192, 196,
    209.

  Bongo, or Bungo, Province of. Earthquake in, i. 167;
       Christianity in, i. 173.

  Bongo, King of. i. 213.

  Bongo Sama, or Nobesane, King of Firando's great-uncle. i. 2, 5, 7,
    11, 14, 15, 17, 20, 41, 61, 65, 67, 78, 79, 116, 118, 121, 143, 231,
    240, 256, 281; ii. 6, 8, 25, 52, 108, 115, 125, 140, 161, 171, 172,
    190, 199, 201.

  Bongo Sama, King of Arima. ii. 162, 163.

  Bonomon Dono, secretary to Tonomon Sama. ii. 115.

  Books, Japanese. i. 205.

  Bordeaux. Image near, i. 238.

  Bowles, John. ii. 257.

  Brockedon, Thomas, president of the Council of Defence. ii. 116,
    117, 138, 179, 204, 320;
       letter to recall the English from Firando. ii. 340.

  Brook, Matthias van der, Dutch merchant at Firando. i. 15, 16, 17,
    28, 34, 41, 298, 306, 332; ii. 50, 59, 125, 142, 149, 153, 178, 180,
    206, 320.

  Brower, Capt. i. 152; ii. 267.

  Browne, ----. ii. 112.

  Browne, Arnold, capt. of the _Palsgrave_. ii. 121, 174, 183, 213.

  Browne, John, at Patani. i. 154, 220, 268.

  Buddha. _See_ Daiboods.

  _Bull_, ship. ii. 112, 114, 119, 194, 205, 223, 318, 319, 331, 332,
    336, 337, 341, 344;
       mutiny, ii. 181, 329.

  Burdock, Roger, of the _Moon_. ii. 175.

  Burges, James and Robert. i. 219, 272, 317, 332, 333, 337; ii. 309.

  Butbee, Christopher. ii. 205.


  Caboques. _Passim._

  Cacazemon, Cacayemon, Cacayezemon, or Cacamon Dono, secretary to
    Oyen Dono. i. 179, 186, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 225, 251, 305, 306,
    310, 311, 312; ii. 57, 72, 83, 85, 86, 90, 95, 125, 140, 224, 233,
    234, 235, 238, 239, 241, 242, 246, 249, 253.

  Caffia Dono, goshon seal-keeper. ii. 235.

  Calicut. Nawab detains English goods. ii. 48.

  Calsa Sama, the Shogun's youngest son. i. 78, 79, 80, 211;
       reported death of, i. 10;
       rumour of war with his father, i. 116;
       report of suicide of, i. 163;
       his disgrace, i. 164;
       orders respecting, i. 158.

  Camangare or Caminogari. i. 158.

  Camboja, or Cambodia. Portuguese banished from, i. 279, 288.

  Camps, Capt. Leonard, Dutch merchant at Firando. i. 233, 264, 286;
    ii. _passim_.

  Canzemon Dono, of Miaco, lacquer maker. ii. 192.

  Canzemon Sama: new name of Tonomon Sama. ii. 169.

  Caravalle, Lopes Sermiento, Capt. ii. 191.

  Carnaby, ----, master of the _Hope_. ii. 329.

  Carnero, Francisco, porter. i. 113, 130.

  Carpenter, ----. i. 114.

  Carwarden, Walter. His uncertain fate, i. 216, 224; ii. 268, 285,
    286.

  Casanseque or Cazanseque, purser or scrivano. Suit against, i. 241,
    242, 245, 248, 252, 263, 279, 281, 282, 283, 287, 289, 294, 296,
    313; ii. 3, 14, 19, 29.

  Caseror. i. 16.

  Castleton, Capt. Samuel. i. 229, 269, 290.

  Cata ura. i. 99.

  Catsso Dono, kinsman of the King of Firando. ii. 136.

  Cattadomary. i. 329.

  Catto Sama Dono, King of Iyo. ii. 245.

  Chambo, Chombo, or Chamba Dono, bongew of Arima. i. 15, 20, 33.

  Champon, in Siam. i. 267, 269, 272, 273.

  Chanchew. i. 35.

  Chapman. ii. 113, 211.

  Charles, Prince of Wales. Report of his marriage, ii. 55.

  Charlton, Andrew. ii. 117.

  Chase, Thomas. i. 229.

  Chauno Shozero Dono, the Shogun's factor. ii. 84, 90, 91, 94, 95,
    96, 231, 234, 244.

  Chaw, or Tea. Cups, etc., i. 145, 202; ii. 11, 28, 58.

  Chimpan, Capt. ii. 153.

  Chimpow, Chinaman. ii. 21, 24.

  Chimtay, Chinaman. ii. 21.

  China. Negotiations for trade with, i. 20, 23, 25, 29, 32, 58, 60,
    66, 74, 83, 101, 116, 223, 296, 298, 340, 341, 342; ii. 2, 3, 21,
    44, 125, 126, 139, 271, 284, 309, 321, 324, 327, 333, 339;
       Tartar wars, i. 219, 284;
       death of the Emperor and his son, ii. 172;
       succession of Emperors, ii. 324, 327;
       travelling spies sent to watch Europeans, ii. 285;
       letters of James I. to the Emperor, ii. 298;
       Dutch acts of piracy against Chinese, i. 259, 260; ii. 40, 41,
         42, 56, 70, 302, 303;
       piracy against Chinese punished by Taiko Sama, i. 277;
       English reported taking junks, ii. 172;
       piracy among Chinese, ii. 321;
       junks taken by English and Dutch, ii. 324;
       cruelties of the Dutch to Chinese, ii. 324, 327.

  Chinese in Japan. Tiger play and tumbling, i. 235;
       feast of Piro, i. 256-258;
       complaint against the Dutch, i. 262, 306; ii. 44;
       visits on birth of a child, i. 332;
       losses by fire at Nagasaki, i. 346;
       visit at the new year, ii. 6;
       fireworks, ii. 9, 10.

  Chiriu. ii. 78, 231.

  Chisian Ducuco, Chinese councillor of state. ii. 125.

  Chongro, Capt. ii. 269.

  Chozamon Dono, son of Oyen Dono of Firando. ii. 140.

  Christians. Persecutions in Kokura, ii. 67;
       massacre and persecutions at Nagasaki, ii. 334, 335.

  Christmas, George, purser of the _Peppercorn_. ii. 179, 184.

  Christopher, German. i. 150.

  Chubio Dono, official at Miako, brother of Safian Dono and uncle of
    Gonrok Dono. i. 49, 73, 159, 179, 180, 200, 258, 289, 318, 319, 331.

  Chubio Dono, host at Bingana Tomo. ii. 159, 160.

  Cleavenger, Charles, capt. of the _Palsgrave_. ii. 117, 119, 121,
    173, 174, 182, 183, 223, 318, 320.

  Clothworkers' Company. Letter of Cocks to, ii. 315.

  Clough, John, gunner. i. 84, 100.

  _Clove_, ship. ii. 269.

  Co Domingo. ii. 59, 219.

  Co John, or Coa John, jurebasso. i. 54, 140, 230, 284, 303, 311; ii.
    5, 31, 61, 98, 119, 139, 144, 154, 156, 207, 219, 248, 345, 347, 348.

  Co John, servant of W. Eaton. i. 136, 141.

  Co John, of Goto. i. 10.

  Co John, of Nagasaki. i. 13.

  Coaker, John. i. 109; ii. 305, 307, 309.

  Cochi, harbour of Firando. _Passim_;
       buildings at, ii. 155;
       fires at, ii. 192, 214.

  Cochinchina. Loss of T. Peacock in, i. 28, 29, 140, 216; ii. 153,
    268;
       trade and communication with, i. 224, 243, 272, 295, 298, 299,
         316; ii. 60, 295, 310.

  Cockram, Capt. Joseph. ii. 117, 119, 122, 123, 172, 173, 174, 183,
    184, 189, 192, 196, 197, 212, 213, 223, 224, 320, 337, 340, 341,
    342, 343, 344, 349.

  Cocks, John, in Staffordshire, brother of R. Cocks. i. 228.

  Cocks, John, in Bantam, nephew of R. Cocks. ii. 16, 54.

  Cocks, Richard, head of the English factory at Firando. _Passim_;
       journeys to and from Yedo, i. 157-166, 193-214; ii. 70-108,
         227-255;
       interview with the Shogun, i. 169; ii. 279;
       journey to and from Miako, i. 300-330;
       visits to Nagasaki, ii, 17-25; ii. 127-188;
       escape from fire, ii. 106;
       correspondence, ii. 257-349;
       proposes to return to England, ii. 339.

  Cocks, Richard, son of the host at Osaka. i. 321.

  Cocks, Richard, son of Maky Dono. ii. 102.

  Cocks, Walter, brother of R. Cocks. i. 48, 114, 152, 155, 229, 290;
    ii. 16, 113, 116, 117, 205.

  Cocora, John, cook. i. 93, 100, 110, 145.

  Codskin Dono, secretary to the Shogun. i. 16, 53, 141, 167, 168,
    169, 170, 172, 174, 177, 184, 185, 186, 187, 189, 190, 192, 205,
    303, 307, 308, 310, 313, 317; ii. 83, 84, 118, 142, 178, 236, 251,
    279, 281, 283, 297.

  Cofio Dono. ii. 122, 167, 170.

  Collins, John. ii. 252.

  Colston, or Coleson, William, purser of the _Thomas_. i. 218, 225,
    330.

  Comets. ii. 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 105.

  Comoro Isles. Action between English and Dutch ships at, ii. 48.

  Cook, John. i. 160, 165, 183, 242, 248, 266; ii. 2, 109.

  Copland, Patrick, preacher. ii. 112.

  Coppindall, Ralph, capt. of the _Osiander_. i. 48, 49, 50, 52, 53,
    54, 55, 61, 63, 68, 69, 71, 76, 79, 80, 81, 85, 86, 87, 90, 96, 100,
    102, 108, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 126, 151, 229, 290; ii. 16,
    54, 273, 275;
       letter, ii. 271.

  Coral. Highly esteemed in China, ii. 287.

  Corea. Embassy from, i. 255, 301, 304, 311, 312, 313; ii. 290, 293,
    299;
       Dutch trade with, ii. 258;
       difficulty of trade with, ii. 270;
       sail-carts in, ii. 270;
       medicinal root from, ii. 287.

  Cornelius: Dutchmen so named. ii. 49, 253, 269.

  Couper, Barnard. i. 229.

  Coye, near Miako. i. 164.

  Coyemon Dono. ii. 170.

  Cozucke, Sophone. i. 229.

  Croby Dono, of Ozaka. i. 323, 325, 326, 327, 328, 330, 336, 339,
    341; ii. 10, 12, 53, 57, 74.

  Crozemon Dono, of Fujikawa. ii. 232.

  Cude Dono. ii. 101.

  Cuemon, plasterer. ii. 170.

  Cuemon Dono, or Grubstreet, host at Ozaka. i. 210, 225, 230, 260,
    262, 264, 302, 303, 304, 314, 322, 323, 324, 325, 330, 333, 342,
    346; ii. 57, 73, 74, 76, 100, 103, 104, 105.

  Cuemon Dono, butcher, of Nagasaki. ii. 112, 124, 128, 130, 153.

  Cugero, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Cuiamon Dono, bongew. i. 198.

  Cuiper, William. ii. 136.

  Cuishti, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Cujero Dono. ii. 147.

  Cuning, Gilbert. i. 39.

  Curwin, Edward. ii. 304, 309.

  Cusa, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Cushcron Dono. i. 36, 108, 131, 132, 135, 141, 216, 217; ii. 29, 38,
    133, 145, 159, 164, 170, 180, 184, 211, 221.

  Cutero Dono, of Totska. ii. 232.

  Cuze Dono. ii. 170, 226.

  Cuzemon Dono. ii. 170.

  Cynemon Dono, of Ozaka. i. 346.


  Daiboods, or Buddha. Image at Kamakura, i. 194;
       image at Miako, i. 200, 201; ii. 75.

  Dairi or Mikado, The. Death of Goyosei, i. 311; ii. 293;
       preparations for his funeral, i. 320.

  Daravis, Salvador. i. 345, 347.

  Davies, Thomas, carpenter. i. 65, 71.

  Dayeynanga Sama, the Shogun's son. ii. 237.

  Dead, Festival of the. i. 46.

  Dembo, near Ozaka. i. 336; ii. 105.

  Dench, John. i. 64.

  Denton, Adam, chief at Patani. i. 36, 48, 87, 90, 114; ii. 47, 116,
    117, 271, 305.

  Deo Dono. His claim to Fidaia Sama's widow, and death, i. 188.

  Dickenson, Gilbert. i. 217.

  Dittis, Capt. Andrea, head of the Chinese in Japan. _Passim._

  Dittis, Augustin, son of A. Dittis. ii. 132, 189.

  Dittis, Ingasha, daughter of A. Dittis. ii. 110.

  Doca, or Dono, Sama, King of Firando. i. 140, 287.

  Dodisworth, Ed., at Surat. i. 156.

  Dodsworth, Harry. ii. 119, 178, 209.

  Domingo: servants and others so named. i. 11, 97, 102, 130, 148,
    153, 210, 276, 310, 323; ii. 219, 221.

  Dorington, George. i. 72, 96, 100, 101, 114, 229.

  Doughtie, ----, quartermaster of the _Osiander_. i. 57.

  Dowriche, George, of Devonshire, serving with the Dutch. i. 276,
    285, 339.

  Driver, John. i. 100.

  Durois, Jonico. ii. 20.

  Durois, Jorge, merchant, of Nagasaki. _Passim._

  Dutch, in the East. Hostilities with the Spaniards, i. 21, 24, 25,
    26, 30, 37, 43, 148, 214, 259, 265, 268, 272, 273, 283, 285, 289,
    ii. 40, 269, 302;
       hostilities with the Portuguese, i. 148, 150; ii. 51, 52, 53,
         55, 273, 274, 276;
       attack Macao, ii. 332;
       piracy against Chinese, i. 259; ii. 40, 41, 42, 56, 70, 302, 303;
       cruelties to Chinese, ii. 324, 327;
       piracy under the English name, i. 260;
       hostilities with the English, i. 269, 292;
       maltreat English, ii. 54;
       capture an English ship, ii. 61;
       fight with the English at sea, ii. 303-305, 316;
       quarrel with the English in the Philippine Is., ii. 324, 326;
       trading ships and fleets, i. 193, 218, 259, 266, 267, 332;
         ii. 17, 18, 47, 173, 223, 319, 324, 325, 331;
       occupy the Pescadore Is., ii. 332.

  Dutch, at Firando. _Passim_;
       execute a slave, i. 19;
       coin false money, i. 22;
       cast cannon, i. 92;
       build a godown, i. 138;
       extension of warehouses, ii. 24, 43;
       damage to their shipping, i. 262;
       sailors desert, i. 264;
       unruly behaviour, i. 274;
       Chinese complain against, i. 306; ii. 46;
       quarrel with the English, ii. 109, 110, 173;
       brawl with Japanese, ii. 177, 189;
       execution of a Dutchman, ii. 181;
       attack the English, ii. 305-307, 317;
       execution of Dutchmen by the Japanese, ii. 328.

  Duzak Skidoyemon Dono. ii. 266.


  Earthquakes. In Bongo, i. 167;
       at Yedo, i. 167, 168, 172, 176, 193; ii. 85, 93, 235, 242, 244,
         247, 250;
       at Miako, i. 205; ii. 77;
       at Kusatsu, ii. 77;
       cause of, ii. 93.

  East India Company. Letters to, ii. 269, 274, 279, 288, 295, 301,
    318, 322, 324, 330, 331, 338;
       treaty with the Dutch, ii. 318.

  Eaton, ----, surgeon. ii. 174.

  Eaton, Helena, daughter of W. Eaton. i. 159, 209; ii. 103, 230.

  Eaton, William, of the English factory at Firando. _Passim._

  Eaton, William, son of W. Eaton. ii. 133.

  Eche Dono. i. 210.

  Echero, or Yechero, Dono, of Ozaka. i. 211, 324, 326, 327.

  Eclipses of the moon. i. 113, 293.

  Ejiri. i. 195; ii. 97, 232, 254.

  Elizabeth, Princess Palatine. News of the birth of her son, i. 36.

  _Elizabeth_, ship. ii. 118, 175, 212, 221, 223, 318, 319, 331, 337;
       mutiny, ii. 120, 121.

  Elks, or wild swans. ii. 91.

  English, in the East. Maltreated by the Dutch, ii. 54;
       fight the Dutch at Jacatra, ii. 304;
       quarrel with the Dutch in the Philippine Is., ii. 324, 326;
       trade, ii. 173, 223, 318, 319, 324, 325, 331.

  English, at Firando. _Passim_;
       arrival, ii. 257;
       building, ii. 266;
       prospects and trade, ii. 259, 288, 297, 309-311, 322, 323;
       colours struck on account of the cross, ii. 267;
       privileges curtailed, ii. 280, 282;
       withdraw factors from Yedo, etc., ii. 282;
       attempt to enlarge privileges, ii. 291, 292, 294, 297;
       privileges extended to Nagasaki, ii. 313;
       libellous verses against their friends, ii. 31;
       mutinies on ships, ii. 120, 181, 121, 182;
       fight of Dutch and English sailors, ii. 173;
       attacked by the Dutch, ii. 305-307, 317;
       build new godown, etc., ii. 134, 137, 141, 143, 144-171 _passim_;
       attempt on their magazine, ii. 201;
       case of arrests for debt, ii. 212, 213, 214, 215, 219, 221,
         225, 226, 227, 236, 241, 243, 250, 254, 328;
       fire at Cochi, ii. 214;
       recall, ii. 331;
       letters and proceedings on their recall, ii. 340-349.

  Enoquena Cambo Dono, maky. (lacquer) bongew. ii. 235.

  Enquese Dono, tiler. ii. 156.

  Essex, Countess of. i. 268.

  Evans, Christopher, sailor. ii. 257.

  _Expedition_, ship. ii. 319.


  Faccata. English trade with, ii. 265.

  Faccata, King of. i. 128, 192.

  Facheman, servant. i. 13, 30; ii. 139, 295.

  Facherozamon Dono, of Fakuroi. ii. 254.

  Facie, an Englishman at Camboja. ii. 47.

  Facunda, or Facondo, near Nagasaki. ii. 4;
       fight of Portuguese and natives at, ii. 8.

  Fajardo, Don Juan de, governor of the Philippine Is. ii. 50.

  Fajardo, Luis. Fight with the Dutch, i. 43.

  Fakuroi. ii. 254.

  Farnandes, ----. i. 264.

  Fary, or Farie, Benjamin, cape-merchant at Siam. i. 155, 215, 220,
    221, 268, 272.

  Febe or Phebe (Hémi). Will. Adams's property, i. 166, 174, 181, 184.

  Femega, Japanese woman. i. 140.

  Fernandes, Diego. i. 151, 228.

  Ferrers, John, in Siam and Bantam. i. 152, 199, 220, 272, 317, 346;
    ii. 117.

  Ferrers, Thomas. i. 152; ii. 117.

  Feske Dono, host at Ozaka. i. 208.

  Fesque Dono, bongew. i. 210, 215, 232.

  Festivals. Of the dead, i. 46, 163, 292;
       horse-racing and shooting, i. 80; ii. 212;
       Gonguach guench, i. 140, 258; ii. 42, 168;
       of Sheco, i. 187;
       new-year, i. 231; ii. 5;
       of Shaka, i. 253; ii. 38, 162;
       of Piro, i. 256-258;
       for Dono Sama of Firando, i. 287;
       Sanguach sanch, ii. 156;
       Shonguach, ii. 245.

  Feze Dono, justice at Nagasaki. ii. 39, 120, 128, 130, 135, 143,
    185, 186, 188, 215, 216.

  Fezemon Dono. ii. 137.

  Ficobioy, founder. ii. 170.

  Ficobuye Dono, of Ejiri. ii. 232.

  Fidaia Sama (Hidéyori), son of Taiko Sama. Defeat and rumours of his
    fate, i. 2, 5, 10, 13, 17, 18, 19, 26, 39, 49, 78, 80, 131, 141,
    142, 149, 192; ii. 270, 272, 274, 275;
       search for his followers, i. 12, 214, 246;
       his son put to death, i. 14;
       slaughter of his followers, i. 14;
       one of his followers racked, i. 177;
       his widow re-married, i. 188;
       his daughter a nun at Kamakura, i. 194.

  Figen or Hizen, King of. i. 126, 128, 198; ii. 58;
       ambassador from, i. 341.

  Figen a Sama, or Figeno Sama, King of Firando. _Passim_;
       his debts, i. 92, 107, 111, 117, 132, 198; ii. 2, 3;
       attendance on the Shogun, i. 98, 110, 205, 222, 254; ii. 35,
         124, 278, 293;
       sickness, i. 156, 157, 207, 313; ii. 86, 94;
       meddles with English trade, i. 227;
       goes to Ishew, i. 235;
       angry with W. Adams, i. 238;
       offended with Cocks, i. 240;
       levies taxes, i. 241, 242;
       threatens to expel the English and Dutch, i. 246;
       Cocks remonstrates with him, i. 254;
       attack on him, ii. 26;
       the queen-mother, ii. 134, 136;
       his marriage, ii. 176, 325;
       his queen, ii. 237, 238, 239;
       Christianity in his family, ii. 250, 330.

  Figeredo Caravallo, Jeronimo de, Portuguese sea captain. ii. 334.

  Fingo, or Higo, King of. i. 146, 213; ii. 245, 249.

  Fingo Shiquan, rich Chinaman. ii. 21, 22, 23, 83.

  Fiokew, secretary of state in China. Letter to him, i. 223, 284.

  Fioyemon Dono. ii. 170.

  Fiquira, Augustino de. ii. 129.

  Firando. _Passim_;
       fires at, i. 106, 238; ii. 55;
       false prophecy of inundation, ii. 155;
       harbour blocked, ii. 200, 203;
       bad anchorage, ii. 314.

  Firando, Kings of. _See_ Doca Sama; Figen a Sama; Foyne Sama.

  Fishing with cormorants. i. 285.

  Flood, Thomas. i. 181.

  _Flushing_, Dutch ship. i. 264, 266, 337, 339, 341, 345.

  Fongo Dono, admiral. i. 182; ii. 84, 85, 88, 99, 240, 283, 284.

  Formosa, or Tacca Sanga, Island. Designs on, i. 80;
       expedition against, i. 131;
       loss of Twan's men at, i. 149;
       failure of attack on, i. 277;
       trade with, ii. 23, 53, 56, 298, 322, 339.

  Foster, James, master of the _Clove_. i. 229.

  Foster, Mrs. ii. 16.

  Fox, host of Miya. ii. 78, 231.

  Fox, Dutch pinnace. ii. 304.

  Foyne Sama, King of Firando. His debts, i. 92;
       his conquests in Omura, i. 140;
       sickness, ii. 267.

  Foyne's Island. ii. 113.

  Frederick, surgeon. i. 89.

  Freman, Ralph. i. 229.

  French. Their armament to aid the Spaniards, ii. 50;
       ships at Bantam, i. 268.

  Frost. ii. 13.

  Frushma, or Tushma, Tay, prince. i. 140; ii. 35, 59, 278;
       report of his burning Yedo, i. 18;
       reported slain, i. 125;
       said to be rebuilding Ozaka, i. 128.

  Fuco, or Fuca, child or servant. i. 93, 230.

  Fujieta. i. 164, 196; ii. 80, 98.

  Fujikawa. i. 197; ii. 98, 232.

  Fujisawa. i. 166, 194.

  Fukae. i. 133.

  Furbeshar, ----, carpenter. ii. 173.

  Fursland, Richard, president at Jacatra. ii. 179, 204, 206, 331, 337;
      letter of recall to the English at Firando, ii. 340.

  Fushimi. i. 79, 101, 160, 161, 205, 305, 319; ii. 74, 77, 230, 290,
    291, 294.


  Gabriel, ----, seaman. ii. 195.

  Galliard, ----, gunner of the _Moon_. ii. 175.

  _Gallias_, Dutch ship. i. 269, 271, 336, 345; ii. 4, 18, 40, 41,
    302, 303, 304.

  Galsworthy, Christopher, of the _Thomas_. i. 218.

  Ganquan, Chinaman at Nagasaki. i. 238.

  Garcis, Jarvasias. ii. 334.

  Garland, Philip. ii. 206.

  Garrocho de la Vega, Pablo, Capt. i. 7, 9, 17, 20, 23, 40, 41, 46,
    54, 64, 65, 66, 70, 122.

  Geemon, Dono, King of Firando's man. ii. 140.

  Gembio, founder. ii. 170.

  Gembio Dono, of Shinagawa. ii. 233.

  Gendoque Dono, of Uringo. ii. 261.

  Genemon Dono, admiral at Firando. i. 61.

  Genemon Dono. ii. 170, 184.

  Genta, Genshe, Gensero, or Gentero, Sama, the King of Firando's
    youngest brother, adopted son of Bongo Sama. i. 58, 120, 121, 166,
    167, 171, 189; ii. 85, 117, 202, 133, 234, 236, 238, 239, 241, 242.

  Gerosaque, Will. Adams's man. i. 337.

  Gibatch, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Gifio Dono, servant of Tozayemon Dono. i. 322, 324; ii. 101, 105.

  Gilbert, Thomas. ii. 205.

  Ginemon Dono, of Kanagawa. ii. 232.

  Gingro, Will. Adams's clerk. i. 56.

  Ginushma. ii. 70, 228.

  Giquan, Capt. i. 155, 230, 245, 252, 263, 280, 281, 282, 283, 287,
    288, 291, 294, 296, 313; ii. 3, 19, 23.

  Giquan, Chinaman. i. 332.

  Gizamon Dono. i. 98.

  Goa. New viceroy, i. 37.

  Goblen, John. i. 24.

  _Godspeed_, junk. ii. 113, 318.

  Gold fish. i. 125, 144, 285; ii. 28, 37.

  Gonguach guench, festival. i. 258.

  Gonosco, or Gonosque, Dono, bongew of Firando. i. 28, 34, 40, 44,
    47, 66, 68, 118, 129, 174, 178, 231; ii. 8, 25, 34.

  Gonosko Dono, father-in-law of Ushanusque Dono. ii. 66.

  Gonrock Dono, governor of Nagasaki. _Passim_.

  Gonsalves, Alvaro. ii. 60, 130, 133, 135, 147.

  Gonsolva, Portuguese. i. 118.

  Goquan, Chinaman. ii. 20, 21, 27, 33, 127.

  Goresak Dono. ii. 170.

  Goresak, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Goresano, or Gorezano, John, jurebasso. i. _passim_; ii. 3, 14, 29.

  Gota Shoyamon Dono, minter. i. 20, 36.

  Gota Zazabra Dono. i. 16, 73, 85.

  Gotad, Chinaman. i. 120.

  Gotarro. ii. 92.

  Goto Island. i. 24, 35, 126; ii. 5, 45, 158, 161, 163;
       Chinese goods at, i. 24;
       King of, i. 221, 222, 249, 250, 313; ii. 154, 293.

  Goto, town of. Burned, i. 73.

  Goulding, John, of the _Elizabeth_. ii. 175.

  Gourden, William, master of the _Hound_. ii. 305, 309.

  Gourney, or Gurney, John, of Siam. i. 16, 64, 80, 82, 87, 90, 114,
    152, 229; ii. 48, 273.

  Grant, Nicholas. i. 92.

  Gray, ----, caulker. ii. 174.

  Green, Lawrance. i. 229.

  Greenwell, William. i. 229.

  Griffin, Peter. ii. 309.

  Groboye Dono, of Okabe. ii. 232.

  Groby Dono. ii. 3, 10, 11, 12, 129.

  Grubstreet. _See_ Cuemon Dono.

  Guarian Ushenusque Dono. ii. 1.

  Guenche or Guenchque. _See_ Tonomon Sama.

  Guinia, Martin de, Portuguese captain. i. 61, 70.

  Guzano, Pedro. ii. 264.


  _Haarlem_, Dutch ship. ii. 223, 319, 336.

  Hachiman, god of war. _See_ Otongo.

  Hakone. i. 165, 195; ii. 81, 97, 253.

  Hall, Peter. i. 272.

  Hamamatsu. i. 163; ii. 79, 98, 232, 254.

  Hang-chow. i. 219.

  Hara. i. 165.

  Harmonson, Derick. ii. 175.

  Harod, Joan. ii. 210.

  Harod, Thomas, of the _Palsgrave_. ii. 175, 210, 309.

  Harris, Edward, boatswain of the _Peppercorn_. Hanged, ii. 205, 207.

  Harris, William. ii. 205.

  Harrison, William, treasurer E.I.C. ii. 116.

  Hatch, Arthur, preacher. ii. 174, 175, 180, 198, 211, 213, 243, 247.

  Hawley, Robert, surgeon. i. 217, 299; ii. 20, 23, 24, 37, 38, 39,
    41, 109, 119, 309.

  Hawtery, John. i. 160, 161, 165, 178, 183, 218.

  Heath, Thomas, carpenter's mate. i. 70, 71.

  Heath, Thomas, gunner of the _Advice_. i. 153, 218.

  _Hector_, ship. i. 268.

  Henrikson, John. ii. 175.

  Henry, Prince of Wales. i. 269.

  Hermosa Island. i. 177.

  Hewet, Sir Thomas. i. 229.

  Hewet, Sir William. i. 229.

  Hidétada. _See_ Shongo Sama.

  Hidéyori. _See_ Fidaia Sama.

  Hidéyoshi. _See_ Taiko Sama.

  Hirado. _See_ Firando.

  Hirakata. i. 161, 206.

  Hix, Alexander. ii. 205.

  Hobson's choice. ii. 294.

  Hôgo. ii. 105, 229.

  Hongo, Chinaman. i. 140.

  _Hope_, ship. ii. 170, 318, 329.

  _Hope_, Dutch ship. ii. 175, 176, 223, 319.

  Houlden, ----. ii. 209.

  _Hound_, ship. Taken by the Dutch. ii. 304, 305, 316, 336.

  Howdane, ----, capt. of the _Swan_. ii. 319.

  _Hozeander_. See _Osiander_.

  Hudson, Richard, of the English factory at Firando. i. 129; ii. 22,
    124, 139, 165, 166, 254, 282, 337, 339, 348.

  Hughes, Hugh, of the _Thomas_. i. 218.

  Humphrey, John, of the _Palsgrave_. ii. 175.

  Hunt, John, master of the _Osiander_. i. 36-229 _passim_.


  Icana Sama. ii. 69.

  Ichemon Dono. ii. 143, 153.

  Ichezayemon Dono. i. 324; ii, 231.

  Ickquam, Chinaman. ii. 17.

  Ikanoura. i. 13, 132, 133.

  Ike Dono, of Satsuma. i. 250; ii. 11.

  Ikshiu Island. Hot baths. i. 80, 118; ii. 37, 39, 152, 268.

  Imatds. i. 300, 301.

  Imory. ii. 158, 159, 161, 164, 165.

  Incobe. ii. 105.

  _Indraught_, Dutch ship. ii. 319.

  Inga Dono, chief justice of Japan. i. 159, 184, 185, 252, 309;
    ii. 44, 75, 230.

  Ingoti. i. 25.

  Ireland, Francis. ii. 225.

  Ishew. _See_ Ikshiu.

  Ishia Dono, of Minakuchi. ii. 231.

  Ishiais Taffio Dono. ii. 231.

  Ishibe. i. 197; ii. 77, 99.

  Ishiyakushi. ii. 78, 99.

  Ishon Dono, King of Firando's physician. i. 159, 169.

  Ismo Dono, noble of Satsuma. ii. 166.

  Ita, slave. ii. 218.

  Itamia Migell Dono. ii. 126, 128, 129, 131, 147, 148, 149, 150, 152,
    153, 171.

  Itamia Quenusque Dono, councillor of the Shogun. ii. 84, 165, 234,
    235, 251.

  Ito Stizemon Dono, poet or singer. ii. 169.

  Ito Yoguiche Dono. i. 97.

  Ive, John. ii. 175.

  Iyéyasu. _See_ Ogosho Sama.

  Iyo, King of. ii. 245.


  Jacatra, in Java. ii. 304, 331, 332, 338.

  _Jacatra_, Dutch ship. i. 35, 52, 78, 152, 153.

  Jacob, Dutch caulker, who came into Japan with Will. Adams. i. 171,
    173.

  Jacobe Dono, clerk. ii. 97.

  Jacobe Dono, boatswain. ii. 196.

  Jambi, in Sumatra. ii. 331, 337.

  James I. of England. Letter and present to the Shogun, i. 307;
       his letter translated, i. 312;
       the same unanswered, i. 316, 317;
       letters to China, ii. 21, 298.

  James, Edward, i. 114, 229.

  _James Royal_, ship. ii. 112, 118, 171, 200, 318, 319, 321.

  Japan. _Passim_;
       policy of the shoguns to the tonos, i. 18, 99, 128, 311; ii.
         35, 37, 163, 277, 278, 293;
       natives fond of change, ii. 273;
       dispute with Japanese sailors from England, i. 297;
       trading company of native merchants, ii. 310, 322;
       provisions and products, ii. 311, 312.

  Jaques, Dutchman. ii. 257.

  Jaquese, servant. i. 161, 190.

  Jeamon Dono. ii. 125.

  Jeffrey, or Jeffery, a boy servant. i. 102, 130, 230, 232; ii. 31.

  Jehan, a scribe. i. 319; ii. 75.

  Jembio Dono, founder. i. 99.

  Jembio Dono, of Hakone. ii. 253.

  Jenchero, or Jenquero, Dono, glover and shoemaker. ii. 170, 215.

  Jenkese, or Jenquese, Will. Adams's man. i. 198, 333; ii. 128, 129,
    130, 138, 211, 240, 253.

  Jenkyn. i. 232.

  Jensamon Dono. ii. 125.

  Jenza, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Jesuits and Friars. Feeling and proclamations against them, i. 171,
    173, 174, 175;
       banished, ii. 270;
       search for, ii. 21, 58;
       embassy of Spaniards ordered away, i. 81; ii. 272, 282;
       priests in Omura, i. 23, 253; ii. 218, 220;
       execution in Omura, ii. 256, 258;
       case of prisoners at Firando, ii. 137, 208, 217, 218, 219, 220,
         221, 222, 235, 320;
       executions at Nagasaki, ii. 334.

  Joco Conde Dono. i. 120.

  John Dono. i. 81, 89.

  John Japon, jurebasso. i. 7, 9, 25, 46, 108, 252, 283, 326, 341; ii.
    1, 3, 28, 92, 139, 218, 219, 241, 265.

  Johnson, John, in Siam. i. 272, 317, 332, 346, 347; ii. 47.

  Johnson, John, Dutchman. ii. 175.

  Johnson, John, van Hamburg. Beheaded, ii. 179, 181.

  Johnson, Piter, master of a junk. i. 89, 91.

  Johnson, William, merchant. i. 89.

  Johnson, William, master of the _Jacatra_. i. 154.

  Johnson [Janson], William (sometimes called John), admiral of the
    Dutch trading fleet. ii. 114, 120, 121, 173, 179, 182, 183, 190,
    194, 196, 197, 199, 200, 204, 206, 208, 211, 223, 319, 326.

  Johnson, William, master of the _Haarlem_. ii. 319.

  Jones, John. Made prisoner by the Dutch, ii. 304, 309.

  Jones, Morris, surgeon. i. 57, 107, 110, 112.

  Jones, Robert. ii. 252.

  Jorge, a caffro. i. 62.

  Joseph, General Benjamin. Slain, ii. 48.

  Jourdain, or Jourden, John, president of the Indies, at Bantam. i.
    48, 87, 90, 101, 107, 113, 114, 126, 151, 215, 223, 226, 229, 230,
    233, 268; ii. 275, 305, 316.

  Jourdain, John, at Patani. ii. 179.

  Joyemon Dono. ii. 175.

  Jubio Dono, servant of the King of Karatsu. i. 133, 137; ii. 25, 47,
    48.


  Kakegawa. i. 164, 196; ii. 80, 232.

  Kamakura, ancient city. i. 193, 194.

  Kambara. i. 165, 195; ii. 80, 254.

  Kameyama. i. 162.

  Kaminoseki. i. 158, 213, 328; ii. 107, 228.

  Kanagawa. i. 193; ii. 82, 97, 232, 253.

  Kanaya. ii. 80, 232, 254.

  Karatsu, King of. i. 76, 89, 289;
       visits Firando, i. 65, 66, 75.

  Karatsu, Nobles of. ii. 56.

  Kawasaki. i. 184.

  Keeling, Capt. William. i. 171, 229, 233, 268, 270; ii. 48, 121,
    282, 313.

  Keemon Dono. i. 108.

  Kenuske Dono, councillor of the Shogun. i. 308.

  King, Richard. i. 153, 269; ii. 2, 49, 99, 119, 179, 184, 295, 306,
    307.

  Kitskin Dono. i. 21, 216; ii. 1, 31, 60, 129.

  Kokura, King of. i. 214.

  Kokura, persecution of Christians in. ii. 67.

  Kuanon. Temple of, at Asakusa, ii. 241.

  Kuanto. ii. 274.

  Kusatsu. i. 161; ii. 100, 230;
       earthquake at, ii. 77.

  Kuwana. i. 197; ii. 78, 99, 231.


  Ladrone Isles. i. 177, 178.

  Lake, Evan (Yewen), of the _Advice_. i. 297.

  Lamb, John Derickson, Dutch general. i. 265, 267, 269, 272, 273,
    274, 276, 277, 285, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 339, 343, 345; ii.
    302.

  Languay. _See_ Nagoya.

  Lanman, Christopher. i. 229; ii. 116.

  Lansman, or Roman, Vincent, Dutchman. ii. 185, 199.

  Larkin, Robert. ii. 271.

  Laurenso. _See_ Sanzero.

  Lawrance, W. Nealson's boy. i. 249.

  Lawrance, R. Cocks's boy. ii. 2, 109, 134, 138, 219.

  Leangu, Lengow, or Liangowne, a Chinaman. i. 74, 223, 230.

  Lefevre, Capt., Dutchman. ii. 194, 196, 205, 208, 211, 223, 319,
    320.

  Legg, William, of the _Bull_. ii. 175.

  Lennis, Edmund, capt. of the _Elizabeth_. ii. 112, 119, 121, 173,
    174, 183, 213, 224, 318.

  Leon. ii. 71, 72, 73.

  Lester, James. ii. 178.

  Lezeamon, Dono, sea bongew. ii. 140.

  Lievana, Juan de. Made prisoner by the Spaniards, i. 1-90 _passim_,
    103, 113, 152; ii. 275, 276.

  _Lion, Black_, Dutch ship. i. 153, 226, 267, 286.

  _Lion, Red_, Dutch ship. i. 266, 293.

  Lisomon Dono. ii. 170.

  Littell, James. ii. 121, 134, 138, 139.

  Lock, Clement, sailor. ii. 257.

  Loochoo, or Liu Kiu, Islands. i. 7, 9, 49; ii. 166, 167, 272.

  Lopas, Francisco. ii. 204, 207.

  Lubbertson, Euert. ii. 175.

  Lues, Spanish tailor. ii. 159, 216.

  Luis, Vilango. i. 148, 287, 289; ii. 36.

  Luisa Dono, wife of Cuemon Dono. ii. 104.


  Macao. Portuguese ships from, _passim_;
       possibility of its capture, ii. 327;
       attack on, by Dutch, ii. 332.

  Macassar. ii. 53, 54.

  Machado, Garcia, of Macao. ii. 23.

  Magazemon Dono, host at Miako. i. 206, 209, 225, 260, 279, 303, 304,
    324, 346, 347; ii. 57, 58, 93, 100, 101.

  Magdalena Maria, Japanese sister-in-law of Will. Adams. i. 61, 284,
    319; ii. 95, 244, 252.

  Magnafen Dono, host at Miako. i. 234.

  Maky (lacquer) Dono. i. 304, 318, 320, 322, 323, 324, 347; ii. 6,
    100, 102, 104.

  Maky Shozemon Dono. ii. 231.

  Malacca. Fighting between Portuguese and Dutch at, i. 148, 150.

  Malconty, Jasper. ii. 257.

  Mallabar, Francisco. ii. 129.

  Mangosa Dono. i. 140.

  Mangusque, servant. ii. 186.

  Manillas. _See_ Philippine Islands.

  Manners and Customs. Caboques, _passim_;
       naming a child, i. 79; ii. 110, 154;
       changing names, i. 237; ii. 169;
       Chinese house-warming, i. 92;
       Japanese house-warming, ii. 29, 38;
       change of houses, ii. 96;
       fishing, i. 57, 58, 285;
       hunting, ii. 210;
       picnicing, ii. 31;
       plays by men and boys, ii. 244;
       selling a debtor, i. 226;
       one causing another's death to die himself, ii. 221;
       law against killing oxen, ii. 236;
       letter to a man who is dead, ominous, ii. 297;
       cutting the hair as a disgrace, i. 156;
       ordeal by fire, ii. 33, 36;
       burial, i. 320; ii. 201, 202.
       _See also_ Punishments.

  Mansho, jurebasso. i. 299.

  Marcus, German. i. 43.

  Maria, Japanese woman. ii. 174.

  Marin, Damian. Made prisoner by the Portuguese, i. 1-103 _passim_;
    ii. 186, 275, 276.

  Martin, Japanese, i. 82.

  Martin, Balthazar. ii. 220.

  Martin, James. ii. 182, 207.

  Martin, Luis. i. 41, 43, 86, 264, 286, 289; ii. 201, 220, 334.

  Martin, Nicholas, jurebasso. i. 1, 33, 118; ii. 170, 184, 194, 227.

  Massamone, or Massamoneda, Dono, father-in-law of Calsa Sama. i.
    116, 163, 164, 192; ii. 239, 240.

  Matabio Oye Dono, host at Oiso. ii. 88.

  Matasabra Dono. i. 66.

  Matinga, Japanese woman. i. _passim_; ii. 6, 31, 38, 65, 76, 83,
    100, 109, 144.

  Matobio Dono, of Oiso. ii. 232.

  Mats, boy. i. 112, 116.

  Mats Dayre Cunay Dono, King of Bizen. ii. 106.

  Matsin, or Matzera, Dayre Yemon Dono, councillor of the Shogun. ii.
    165, 235.

  Mattem Dono. i. 193.

  Matzera Crodze Sama. _See_ Sangero Sama.

  Medina, Capt. i. 43.

  Mia Nots. i. 213.

  Miako. i 198, 205, 305, 318; ii. 100, 230;
       temples and monuments at, i. 200-202; ii. 75;
       earthquakes at, i. 205; ii. 77.

  Miako, in Cochinchina. ii. 268.

  Micarna Camme Sama, the Shogun's grandson. i. 131.

  Middleton, Capt. David. i. 36, 223.

  Migmoy, or Macchiavelli, a Japanese trader. i. 39, 168, 170, 176,
    178, 179, 180.

  Miguel, Corean jurebasso. i. 14, 40, 46, 54, 55, 131, 132, 135; ii.
    13, 29, 50, 219.

  Miguel, the Tico. i. 226, 251, 254.

  Mihara. ii. 72, 106, 107.

  Minakuchi. i. 161; ii. 231.

  Minema Soyemon Dono. ii. 140.

  Miracle. i. 335.

  Misaki. i. 182.

  Mishima. i. 165, 195; ii. 81, 97, 232.

  Missaka. i. 164; ii. 98.

  Mitske. i. 163, 196; ii. 79, 98.

  Miya. i. 162, 197; ii. 78, 99, 231.

  Moluccas, The. Reported hostilities between the Dutch and Spaniards,
    i. 24, 26, 30, 37, 214, 269.

  Mon, boy. i. 116, 232.

  Mon, or Man, slave. ii. 132, 133, 135, 143, 144, 154.

  _Moon_, ship. ii. 114, 119, 123, 174, 221, 223, 318, 319, 329, 331,
    336, 337.

  _Moon, New_, Dutch ship. i. 283; ii. 304.

  _Moon, Old_, Dutch ship. i. 283.

  Moore, John. ii. 304, 309.

  Morano Cofioze, singer. ii. 169.

  Moreton, Matthew, master of the _Peppercorn_. ii. 179, 209, 224.

  Morgan, William, of the _Elizabeth_. ii. 175.

  Moro, Mouro, or Muru. i. 302, 328; ii. 73, 229.

  Mortaza Ali i. 253.

  Moure, John, boy. i. 51.

  Muki. i. 329.

  Munden, John, capt. of the _Bull_. ii. 119, 174, 183, 198, 203, 213,
    318.

  Muños, Alvaro. _Passim._

  Musioyen Dono, bongew of Goto. i. 293.

  _Muyen_, or _Mogen_, Dutch ship. ii. 179, 194, 203, 208, 209, 212,
    325, 336.


  Nacafaroya Genimon Dono, of Odawara. ii. 232.

  Nafa, in Liu Kiu Islands. ii. 58.

  Nagasaki. Ravages of small-pox at, i. 11;
       Christianity in, i. 173;
       blockaded, i. 214, 218;
       fire at, i. 345, 346;
       Japanese traders at, ii. 297;
       capacity for commerce, ii. 313, 314;
       destruction of churches and monasteries in, ii. 315;
       massacre of Christians, ii. 334.

  Nagoya, or Languay. i. 157, 300, 329, 330; ii. 70, 108, 161, 165,
    168.

  Narami. i. 197.

  Naygen Sama. ii. 349.

  Nealson, William, of the English factory at Firando. _Passim._

  Neve, John, purser of the _Moon_. ii. 184, 189.

  _New Year's Gift_, ship. i. 156.

  New Spain. Japanese expelled from, ii. 274.

  _New Zealand_, Dutch ship. ii. 198, 223.

  Neyemon, or Neamon, Dono, merchant at Yedo. i. 173, 196, 225, 247,
    310, 319, 326, 327, 329, 346; ii. 57, 74, 295.

  Nicoles, or Nicolles, William, agent at Malaya. ii. 189, 200, 204,
    326.

  Niquan, Chinaman. i. 88, 101, 102, 110, 122, 215, 219, 294, 296; ii.
    6, 8, 17, 18, 22, 32, 45, 69, 139, 148.

  Niquan, of Nanking. ii. 22.

  Nobesane. _See_ Bongo Sama.

  Nobeske Dono. ii. 8.

  Noise of trumpets. i. 343; ii. 332.

  Nomozaky Island. i. 265.

  North-west passage from Japan. Will. Adams's views, ii. 258, 270,
    283, 288.

  Nubery, Mall. ii. 120.

  Numadsu. ii. 254.


  Odawara. i. 165, 195; ii. 81, 97, 232, 253.

  Offley, Robert. i. 229.

  Ogosho Sama (Iyéyasu), Shogun. Born at Okazaki, i. 163; ii. 79;
       defeats Fidaia Sama (Hidéyori), i. 2, 5; ii. 272, 274, 275;
       sues for the title of Kwambakku, i. 44;
       rumour of war with his son, i. 116;
       conversation with Will. Adams on the hatred of Spaniards and
         Dutch, ii. 276, 277;
       report of sickness, i. 128, 141;
       his treatment of his physician, ii. 278, 279;
       report of his death, i. 103, 125, 126; ii. 278;
       his death, i. 142, 144;
       his shrine at Miako, ii. 75;
       his tomb at Yedo, ii. 85;
       his anniversary, ii. 87, 243;
       tomb of his son, ii. 88.

  Oigawa. ii. 80.

  Oiso. i. 166, 195; ii. 81, 97, 232, 253.

  Okabe. ii. 232, 254.

  Okazaki. i. 163; ii. 79, 98.

  Okebank, Philip, of the _Moon_. ii. 175.

  Ompera. i. 342.

  Omura, or Umbra, Province of. ii. 8, 29, 35, 115, 293, 313;
       conquests in, by Foyne Sama, i. 140;
       Christianity in, i. 134, 173;
       priests seized and executed, i. 253, 256, 258.

  Onshma Island. ii. 227.

  Oque Dono. ii. 113.

  Ordnance. Japanese method of casting, i. 34;
       castings, lists, etc., i. 95, 99, 107, 108, 255, 256; ii. 136,
         309.

  Orengawa. i. 167, 173, 174, 181, 184.

  _Osiander_, or _Hozeander_, ship. i. 36, 48, 50, 51, 52, 56, 61, 62,
    71, 72, 80, 88, 101, 103, 109, 111, 115, 135.

  Osterwick, John, of the English factory at Firando. _Passim._

  Otonagen Dono. i. 66.

  Otongo Fachemon (Ojin Tenno, or Hachimon), god of war. Temples at
    Yedo, ii. 87, 89, 240.

  Otsu. i. 161, 197, 317; ii. 100.

  Otto, Matinga's maid. i. 83, 93, 230; ii. 109, 144.

  Otto Dono, councillor of the Shogun. i. 180, 308; ii. 84, 234, 242,
    246, 251.

  Owen, ----, surgeon. ii. 174.

  Oyen Dono, secretary to the King of Firando. i. 5, 22, 36, 52, 59,
    66, 86, 100, 107, 115, 117, 118, 126, 130, 132, 142, 220, 226, 227,
    231, 232, 236, 239, 248, 252, 297, 341, 348; ii. 4, 6, 7, 25, 26,
    28, 61, 63, 64, 108, 125, 135, 140, 142, 145, 185, 221, 267.

  Oyen Dono, secretary to the Shogun. i. 170, 175, 179, 180, 184, 185,
    186, 189, 191, 205, 303, 307, 308, 310, 311, 312, 313, 315, 317; ii.
    84, 86, 90, 92, 93, 117, 165, 234, 235, 236, 239, 241, 246, 249,
    251, 252, 281, 283, 297.

  Ozaka. i. 158, 206, 209, 212, 302, 321; ii. 73, 102, 104, 229, 230;
       captured by Iyéyasu, i. 2, 5; ii. 275;
       great slaughter at, i. 12;
       rebuilding of, i. 14, 128; ii. 293;
       fortification of, i. 79;
       trade with, i. 88;
       fire at, i. 117;
       executions at, i. 130;
       explosion at, i. 324.


  _Palsgrave_, or _Palsgrove_, ship. ii. 121, 176, 193, 212, 214, 218,
    223, 318, 319, 331, 332, 337, 340.

  Palle, father of Yoshiemon the bonze. ii. 25.

  Parsons, Benjamin, surgeon of the _Advice_. i. 295.

  Patani, in Malaya. Dutch trade with, ii. 258.

  Paul, servant. ii. 128, 131, 219, 226.

  Paul Dono, gunpowder man at Nagasaki. ii. 129, 132, 133, 135, 142,
    143, 144, 159, 169.

  Payne, Michael, carpenter of the _Samson_. ii. 305, 309.

  Peacock, Tempest. Killed in Cochinchina, i. 140, 216, 224, 293, 295;
    ii. 264, 268, 285, 286, 296.

  Pedro, porter. i. 124, 131.

  _Peppercorn_, ship. ii. 178, 193, 203, 208, 209, 212, 325, 331, 336.

  Pepwell, Capt. Henry. ii. 48.

  Persia. English factory in, ii. 48.

  Pescadore Islands, near Formosa. ii. 298;
       occupied by the Dutch, ii. 332, 336, 339.

  Petersen, John, Dutchman. ii. 174.

  Peterson, James. ii. 50.

  Pheby, John. i. 16, 69, 244; ii. 262, 266.

  Phesemon Dono. ii. 24.

  Pheze Dono. ii. 118.

  Philippine Islands. English and Dutch trade and shipping to, i. 15,
    265; ii. 123, 169, 172, 319, 324, 325, 331;
       capture of Shibou, i. 21;
       hostilities between the Dutch and Spanish, i. 24, 25, 30, 37,
         259, 265, 273, 285, 286, 289; ii. 40, 269, 302;
       Japanese to be banished from, ii. 188;
       quarrels of the English and Dutch, ii. 324, 326.

  Pinta, woman. ii. 220.

  Piro, or Pilo, festival of. i. 256-258.

  Pitts, Richard, in Siam. i. 272, 317, 332, 346, 347; ii. 47, 48, 50.

  Portent in England. ii. 57.

  Portis, or Porteous, John. ii. 54, 56, 60, 65, 109, 110, 180, 205,
    309.

  Portuguese, in the East. Shipping from Macao, i. 83, 106, 122, 135,
    137, 175, 263, 266, 267, 333; ii. 4, 5, 8, 14, 17, 43, 169, 170,
    181, 187;
       hostilities against the English and Dutch, i. 35, 171, 273,
         278, 279;
       Port. junk taken by the Dutch, i. 35; ii. 273, 274, 276;
       fight with Dutch at Malacca, i. 148, 150;
       banished from Camboja, i. 279, 280;
       quarrel with W. Eaton in Satsuma, ii. 18, 19;
       fight with Dutch ships, ii. 51, 52, 53, 55;
       action of an English with a Port. ship, ii. 48;
       Port. ship taken by the English and Dutch, ii. 212;
       Dutch attack on Macao, ii. 332;
       restricted trade with Japan, ii. 144, 298.

  Potatoes. First planting of, in Japan, i. 11;
       sent from the Liu Kiu Isles, ii. 59.

  Priapus, Japanese. Altar of, i. 238.

  Price, Robert. ii. 117.

  Pring, Martin, captain of the _James Royal_. ii. 54, 112, 113, 114,
    115, 116, 205, 318, 321, 322.

  Privileges of the English in Japan. Curtailed, ii. 280, 281;
       copy of, ii. 289;
       attempts to enlarge them, i. 312, 315, 316; ii. 238, 291, 292,
         294, 297.

  Puchin, St. Image of, i. 238.

  Puloway Island. Expulsion of English by the Dutch, i. 269, 274, 275,
    292.

  Punishments. Executions by cutting, i. 91, 120, 146, 156; ii. 134;
       crucifixion, i. 161;
       roasting a thief to death, i. 291;
       execution of thieves, ii. 104;
       imprisonment by proxy, ii. 135;
       burning of Jesuits, etc., ii. 334;
       a slave executed by the Dutch, i. 19;
       Dutchmen beheaded by the Japanese, ii. 177, 328;
       a Dutchman beheaded for killing an Englishman, ii. 181;
       an Englishman hanged for killing a Dutchman, ii. 175;
       runaway English sailors hanged, ii, 207;
       flogging and salting a slave of the English, i. 344;
       flogging and salting English sailors, ii. 198.


  Quannow. _See_ Kuanon.

  Quanto. _See_ Kuanto.

  Quiamo Dono. i. 88.

  Quiemon Dono, barkman. ii. 254.

  Quitamare. ii. 70.


  Rappado, barber. i. 93.

  Ravelles, or Ravello, Gonsalo, Portuguese. ii. 191, 216, 222.

  Refwen Dono, King of Firando's steward. i. 100.

  Rigote, Diego Farnando. i. 77.

  Riyoyets Dono. ii. 17.

  Roane, John. Hanged for murder, ii. 174, 175.

  Robin, Scotchman. i. 84.

  Robinson, ----. ii. 113.

  Rocha, Bartholomew de la. i. 63.

  Rodrigos, Emanuel. ii. 130, 146, 147.

  Roquan, Chinaman. i. 120.

  _Roquan_, junk. ii. 264.

  Rowe, Richard, master of the _Thomas_. i. 145, 147, 150, 153, 183,
    215, 218, 223, 225, 228, 233.


  Sackay. i. 208, 323; ii. 103;
       destroyed, ii. 275;
       rebuilding of, i. 14.

  Sacky Bingo Dono, governor of the Shogun's son. ii. 237.

  Saco Dono, magistrate of Nagasaki. ii. 17.

  Sada Dono, father of Codgkin Dono. i. 106, 117;
       tomb at Yedo, ii. 85.

  Sadaye Dono, secretary to the governor of Ozaka. i. 211.

  Sadler, Francis. i. 152, 229.

  Safian Dono, governor of Nagasaki. i. 6, 15, 53, 73, 84, 85, 146,
    159, 180, 185, 187, 196, 206, 207, 208, 215, 224, 239, 256, 258,
    289, 294, 305, 309, 322, 323, 331, 333, 345; ii. 11, 13, 286.

  _St. Michel_, French ship. ii. 319.

  Salinas, Miguel de. i. 43, 148, 334.

  Sammabash. i. 195.

  _Samson_, English ship taken by the Dutch. ii. 304, 305, 316.

  Sanfort, Melchor van. i. 19, 70, 80, 82.

  Sangero, cook. ii. 139.

  Sangero Sama, son of Foyne Sama, King of Firando. i. 50, 54, 64, 65,
    97, 125, 155, 222, 232, 249, 251; ii. 6, 14, 25, 29, 125, 140;
       his name changed to Matzrea Crodze Sama, ii. 169.

  Sangusque Dono, of Chiriu. ii. 231.

  Sannemon Dono. ii. 170.

  Sanquan, Chinaman. ii. 19.

  Sanquishe Dono. ii. 17, 19, 22.

  Sanshero, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  _Santa Cruz_, Dutch pinnace. ii. 336.

  Sanzero, or Laurenzo, slave of the English. i. 219.

  Sanzo Dono. i. 140.

  Saquemon Dono, magistrate at Nagasaki. ii. 17, 18.

  Saris, George. i. 152.

  Saris, Capt. John. i. 16, 48, 152, 223, 229, 297; ii. 16, 116, 205,
    257.

  Sars, John, sailor. ii. 257.

  Satsuma, Province of. Prospect of trade with, i. 81, 124, 149; ii.
    272;
       nobles of, i. 147, 148;
       disturbances by disbanded soldiers, i. 255;
       ambassador from, ii. 43, 44;
       priests seized in, ii. 334.

  Satsuma, King of. i. 52, 113, 125, 140, 214, 215, 237, 262, 313; ii.
    160, 293;
       visits Firando, i. 4, 6, 122, 123, 250;
       detained at Court, i. 18;
       war preparations, i. 82;
       rebuilding Ozaka, i. 128;
       report of intending war against the Shogun, i. 149;
       friendship to the English, i. 215, 216, 220; ii. 58, 59;
       favours the Chinese, i. 263.

  Savidge, George, in Camboja. i. 288, 346; ii. 47, 67.

  Sayemon Dono, of Kambara. ii. 254.

  Sayemond, scullion. i. 30.

  Sayers, Edmund, of the English factory at Firando. _Passim._

  Scongero Dono. i. 99.

  Scott, Cornelius, pilot. ii. 41.

  _Sea Adventure_, junk. i. 7, 70, 79, 87, 88, 154, 155, 219, 221,
    269, 282, 299, 300, 317, 340, 342, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348; ii. 1,
    2, 12, 15, 18, 36, 58, 270, 291.

  Sebastian, King of Portugal. Comet seen at the time of his death,
    ii. 97.

  Sebeoye Dono, of Ozaka. ii. 57.

  Seden, of Mishima. ii. 232.

  Seezamon Dono, timber man. ii. 141.

  Seki. i. 197; ii. 78, 79.

  Semi Dono, minister of the King of Firando. _Passim._

  Sesque Dono. ii. 140.

  Seto. i. 235; ii. 17, 132, 189.

  Seyemon Dono. ii. 170.

  Sewall, Francis. i. 114.

  Sewall, William, of Coventry. i. 229.

  Shaka, festival of. i. 253; ii. 38.

  Shanks, Henry, gunner. i. 234, 247, 261, 284; ii. 156.

  Sharpe, ----. i. 87.

  Shashma. _See_ Satsuma.

  Shebe Dono, son of Cuemon Dono. ii. 100.

  Sheco, festival of. i. 187; ii. 85.

  Shemash, or Shimash, Dono, governor of Ozaka and grandson of
    Iyéyasu. i. 207, 321, 322, 325; ii. 74, 278, 279.

  Shengro, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Sheningaua. ii. 97.

  Shepperd, John. i. 97.

  Shequenogize. ii. 231.

  Sheraish Island. ii. 72, 73.

  Sheroyemon Dono. ii. 140.

  Shesque Dono. ii. 25.

  Shezemon Dono. ii. 157, 161, 164, 170.

  Shezero, caboque. i. 181, 188.

  Shezque Dono, father of Sugien Dono. i. 109.

  Shibou, in the Philippine Islands. Capture of, i. 21.

  Shikoku. Envoy from, i. 226.

  Shimonoseki. i. 157, 214, 301, 302, 329; ii. 71, 72, 107, 228.

  Shimotsai. ii. 106.

  Shinagawa. ii. 82, 233, 253.

  Shinso Dono. ii. 124.

  Shippard, John. i. 64, 93, 94.

  Shiquan, Chinaman. ii. 17, 18, 21, 28.

  Shisque, or Shiske, Dono. i. 328; ii. 74.

  Shobick, Capt. i. 155.

  Shobioye Dono. ii. 153.

  Shoby Dono. i. 267, 272, 286, 315.

  Shofan Dono, physician. ii. 169.

  Shongo Dono, admiral. i. 168, 170, 177, 178, 180, 191, 307, 309; ii.
    138, 162, 240, 251.

  Shongo Sama (Hidétada), Shogun. Reported death, i. 10;
       succeeds his father, i. 142, 144;
       receives the English deputation, i. 168, 169;
       report of his intentions against Christians, i. 174;
       goes out hawking, i. 175; ii. 91;
       sends presents to the Emperor of China, i. 249;
       fails to control the tonos, i. 276;
       offended with the Dutch for piracy, i. 295;
       decision on the complaint of the Chinese against the Dutch,
         i. 306;
       letter and present to, from James I., i. 307;
       death of his daughter, i. 312;
       visit of his brothers, i. 315;
       presents to Cocks and Adams, i. 317;
       report of his death, ii. 14, 28;
       rumour of his retirement, ii. 38;
       his daughter betrothed to the Dairi, ii. 98, 99;
       rumour of wars with his uncles, ii. 247;
       curtails the privileges of the English, ii. 279, 282;
       copy of privileges granted by him, ii. 289;
       expected title from the Dairi, ii. 291, 293;
       his enmity to Christians, ii. 335, 336;
       conspiracy against him, ii. 338.

  Shonguach, festival of. ii. 245.

  Shono. i. 197.

  Short, Richard, master's mate of the _Moon_. ii. 204, 205, 208, 209.

  Shosque Dono, King of Firando's chamberlain. i. 66, 69, 107, 253,
    256, 281, 337; ii. 26.

  Showan Dono, physician. ii. 169.

  Shoyemon Dono. ii. 159.

  Shoyemon Dono, master of the caboques. ii. 23, 36.

  Shrongo Sama, the Shogun's eldest brother. His house, ii. 96.

  Shroyemon Dono, of Ozaka. i. 211, 274, 278, 325, 327, 346.

  Shushro Dono. ii. 149.

  Siam. Shipping and trading with, i. 2, 87, 88, 90, 219, 243, 276,
    292, 316, 332, 340, 342, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348; ii. 1, 2, 36, 47,
    130, 220, 258, 269, 310.

  Sichsaymon Dono. ii. 25.

  Sifian Dono, bongew. i. 52, 60, 62, 66, 68, 130, 232, 244.

  Silva, Don Jeronimo de, governor of the Philippine Is. ii. 55.

  Silva, Don Juan de, governor of the Philippine Is. i. 21, 24, 148,
    150, 259, 285.

  Simon, jurebasso. i. 13, 20, 26, 76.

  Sinda Dono, of Sackay. i. 314, 317, 323, 327.

  Sinemon, carpenter. ii. 170.

  Sinemon Dono: new name of Sinze, barkman. i. 237.

  Sinzabra, boatman. i. 24.

  Sinze. _See_ Sinemon Dono.

  Skengero Dono, of Miako. i. 322, 326; ii. 57, 100, 101, 247.

  Skeyo, scullion. i. 132, 134, 135.

  Skiamon Dono. i. 24, 69, 129, 146, 337; ii. 10, 27.

  Skidayen Dono, chief justice at Nagasaki. ii. 152.

  Skidayen Dono, secretary to Gonrock Dono. ii. 133, 135, 143, 150,
    152, 185, 186, 188.

  Skidayen Dono, trader. i. 33, 55, 61, 77, 90, 116, 119, 129, 130,
    216, 219, 220, 232, 269, 334; ii. 10, 11.

  Skirako. i. 161.

  Skite, or Skeete. i. 84, 136, 232.

  Skozemon Dono, of Yoshiwara. ii. 232.

  Skrayamon Dono. i. 103.

  Slany, Humphrey. i. 228.

  Slaves or apprentices. i. 112, 115, 116, 219; ii. 1, 2, 24, 31, 132.

  Smart, Abraham. ii. 118, 209.

  Smith, a Staffordshire man, cook of the _Moon_. ii. 118.

  Smith, Harry. ii. 205.

  Smith, Henry, purser of the _Royal James_. ii. 113, 174.

  Smith, Sir Thomas. i. 48, 114, 152, 155, 219, 229, 231, 233, 290;
    ii. 16, 17, 116, 205, 257.

  Smith, Lady. Lacquer ware for, ii. 9;
       trade venture, ii. 297.

  Snow. Heavy fall, ii. 111.

  Sobioque Dono, secretary to Gentero Dono. ii. 233.

  Soca Sama. ii. 18.

  Sofa, Sofo, or Sofy, Dono, a bonze. i. 198, 204, 318, 336.

  Sofo Dono, physician. ii. 169.

  Sofo Sama. ii. 25.

  Soka Dono, of Faccata. ii. 115, 119, 120, 158.

  Somner, Thomas, of the _Thomas_. i. 218.

  Sonchio Dono. ii. 122.

  Soude Giemon. ii. 153.

  Soyemon Dono, King of Firando's steward. i. 60, 62, 66, 92, 99, 103,
    104, 107, 109, 115, 118, 125, 128, 134, 136, 142, 149, 217, 220,
    232, 246, 254, 260, 276, 278, 281, 282, 285, 291; ii 13, 79.

  Soyemon Dono, of Kanaya. ii. 232.

  Soyen Dono, of Nagasaki. ii. 17.

  Sozero Dono, of Arai. ii. 232.

  Spalding, Capt. Augustine, one of the Council of Defence. ii. 116,
    117, 138, 320;
       letter of recall to the English at Firando, ii. 340.

  Spaniards, in the East. Reported embassy to Japan, i. 38;
       hostilities with the Dutch, i. 21, 24, 25, 26, 30, 37, 43, 148,
         214, 259, 265, 268, 272, 273, 283, 285, 289; ii. 40, 269, 302;
       loss of a ship off Satsuma, i. 193, 196;
       ships in Satsuma, ii. 282, 283;
       privateer at Tsushima, ii. 54;
       trade with Japan, ii. 274.

  Speck, Jacob, head of the Dutch in Japan. _Passim_.

  Starkasse, Harry. i. 332.

  Stibio, or Quedoquea Stibio, Dono, of Suruga. i. 165, 195; ii. 261.

  Sticamon Dono, King of Firando's jester. i. 77.

  Stroyemon, or Shroyemon, Dono, bongew. ii. 125, 224, 225, 228, 233,
    236, 239, 241, 242, 244, 246, 248, 249, 253, 255.

  Sua. ii. 107.

  Suffolk, Earl of, Lord Treasurer. i. 114.

  Suga Dono, chief justice at Yedo. ii. 230.

  Sugian, or Sugien, Dono, of Omura. i. 16, 17, 20, 23, 39, 45, 60,
    65, 97, 118, 122, 125, 146, 154, 232; ii. 6, 7, 30, 58, 64, 85, 140.

  _Sun_, Dutch ship. i. 266, 267, 269, 271, 336, 339, 342, 343; ii.
    15, 16, 40, 196, 302, 303.

  _Sun, New_, Dutch ship. i. 268; ii. 302.

  Sunega, Pedro de. _See_ Zuñiga.

  Surat. Report of massacre of English at, i. 21.

  Suruga, or Shrongo. i. 165, 195; ii. 80, 98.

  Susanna, servant. i. 210, 331; ii. 109, 111, 134, 215, 218.

  Swager, Jacob. i. 17, 19, 111, 113, 121, 247, 264; ii. 149, 178.

  _Swan_, English ship taken by the Dutch. i. 289; ii. 120, 134, 182,
    204, 304, 316, 319, 325.

  Sweetland, William. i. 161, 183, 208, 230.

  Syen Dono, governor [of Firando ?]. i. 242.

  Synemon Dono. i. 119, 135; ii. 26, 159, 164.


  Tabilo, or Tabola, Island. i. 231; ii. 31, 34, 152, 155, 156, 157,
    159, 161, 162, 164, 165.

  Tacca Sackey, or Taccasanga. i. 158, 212.

  Taccamon Dono, chief justice at Firando. _Passim_.

  Tachemon, cook. ii. 24.

  Taffian Dono, Codgkin Dono's secretary. i. 310.

  Taffy, or Taffio, Dono. ii. 5, 6, 31, 170.

  Taiko Sama (Hidéyoshi). His siege of Odawara, i. 165;
       punishes piracy, i. 277;
       his tomb at Miako, i. 201, 202;
       designs on China, ii. 271.

  Tanares, Luis. ii. 57.

  Tangano. i. 346.

  Tango Dono. ii. 25.

  Tansho Sama. i 75.

  Tasquey. ii. 47.

  Tayamon Dono, master carpenter. i. 113, 142; ii. 136, 137, 151, 164,
    170.

  Tea. _See_ Chaw.

  _Thomas_, ship. i. 145, 151, 218, 222, 223, 226, 228, 230; ii. 279.

  Thomas, cook. i. 247.

  Thomas, Rowland, purser of the _Osiander_. i. 53, 54, 55, 100, 110,
    111.

  Thornton, ----. ii. 329.

  Ticham, or Tykam, Shafno, councillor of state in China.
    Communication with him, i. 58, 223; ii. 125, 284.

  Tiquan, sailor. ii. 1.

  Toba. ii. 267.

  Tobacco. Order for its destruction, i. 35.

  Tobio Dono. ii. 157, 160, 167, 170, 177, 188.

  Tobioye Dono, garden bongew. ii. 140.

  Tomari. ii. 12.

  Tomas, Jesuit. i. 3.

  Tomas, Japanese padre. ii. 221.

  Tome, servant or slave. i. 10, 13, 45, 51.

  Tome, of Nagasaki. ii. 134.

  Tome, or Tome Dono: jurebassos so named. i. 54, 76, 225, 226, 310,
    319; ii. 97, 102, 126, 127, 139, 145, 166, 219, 241.

  Tome Dono, of Firando, papist. i. 60, 70, 75, 100, 104, 113, 130,
    132, 135, 216, 217, 276.

  Tome Dono, jurebasso to Massamone Dono. i. 247, 284.

  Tome Dono, barkman. i. 304.

  Tome Sama. Another name of Figen a Sama, King of Firando, ii. 261,
    267.

  Tomu in Bingo. _See_ Bingana Tomo.

  Toncha Sama. ii. 4.

  Tonomon Sama, or Guenche Sama, eldest brother of the King of
    Firando. _Passim_;
       his name changed to Canzemon Sama, ii. 169.

  Tonquin. i. 298; ii. 60, 300, 310.

  Toraga, or Torage. i. 24, 232.

  Torazemon Dono. i. 66, 106, 109, 139, 148, 149, 254, 305, 306, 310,
    313, 317; ii. 6-252 _passim_.

  Torosacka, Will. Adams's man. ii. 130.

  Torres, Jeronimo de, viceroy of Goa. i. 37.

  _Tortola_, Dutch ship. ii. 336, 337.

  Totska, or Todska. i. 166; ii. 82, 97, 232.

  Totton, John, master of the _Advice_. i. _passim_; ii. 15, 17.

  Totty, John, sailor. ii. 257.

  Toyamon Dono, of Yedo. i. 100.

  Tozayemon Dono, host at Sackay. i. 199-347 _passim_; ii. 10-118
    _passim_.

  Tozemon Dono, of Numadsu. ii. 254.

  Tozo Dono. ii. 279.

  Trebioye Dono, bongew. ii. 143, 144.

  Trees. i. 117, 118, 121, 122, 124, 125, 128, 247; ii. 5.

  _Trowe_, Dutch ship. ii. 113, 219, 223, 319, 336.

  Trumpeter, ----. ii. 213.

  Tsuchiyama. i. 162; ii. 78, 99.

  Tsushima Island. i. 24, 66, 88, 101, 301; ii. 54, 258, 270.

  Tsushima, King of. i. 312; ii. 293, 299;
       tribute of, a root, ii. 287.

  Tsuyasaki. ii. 70.

  Tuestro, Japanese sailor. ii. 180.

  Turbervill, Robert, of the _Elizabeth_. ii. 172, 175.

  Turner, Peter, i. 114, 228.

  Tushma. _See_ Tsushima.

  Tushma, boy. i. 51.

  Tushma Dono, councillor of the Shogun. i. 183, 308, 316; ii. 84.

  Tushma Tay. _See_ Frushma Tay.

  Twan, Tuan, or Towan, Dono, of Nagasaki. i. 71, 124, 126, 251;
    ii. 10;
       expedition by his son against Formosa, i. 131;
       privateering on the China coast, i. 149;
       return of his ships from Formosa, i. 277;
       accusations against him, ii. 39;
       disgraced, ii. 69.


  Ucana Came, of Satsuma. ii. 140.

  Umbra. _See_ Omura.

  Ummea Ichazemon Dono, of Hamamatsu. ii. 232.

  Unagense Dono, captain-general of Firando. i. 19, 66, 69, 111, 118,
    132, 232, 234, 244, 291; ii. 1, 7, 8, 124, 125, 190.

  Uncam, bongew of a junk. i. 140.

  Underwick, Luke. ii. 205.

  _Unicorn_, ship. ii. 40, 170, 172, 181, 318.

  Unquan, Chinaman, i. 97, 237.

  Uquese Dono, tiler, ii. 143, 162.

  Ushenusque Dono, bongew. i. 14, 16, 39, 51, 66, 120, 122, 261, 266,
    276; ii. 11.

  Utsymado. _See_ Woshmado.


  Valche, Henrock, capt. of the Dutch _Hope_. ii. 319.

  Vasconcellos, Diego de, viceroy of Goa. i. 37.

  Vaux, ----, Dutchman. ii. 174, 184.

  Vries, or Vryz, Derick de. i. 85, 89, 97, 111.

  Vrolick, James. ii. 316.


  Wacange Sama, the Shogun's son. ii. 84.

  Waddon, or Wadden, Peter. i. 57, 65, 91; ii. 199.

  Watkins, David. ii. 9.

  Wattary. ii. 71.

  Wattes, Richard, purser of the _Bull_. ii. 175, 184, 344.

  Weamon Dono. ii. 125.

  Wedmore, Richard, master's mate of the _Advice_. i. 291, 330; ii. 1,
    5.

  Westby, Richard, in Bantam. i. 48, 290; ii. 16, 114.

  Westerwood, Adam, Dutch commander. ii. 302, 317.

  Whaw, or Whow, Chinese trader at Nagasaki. _Passim._

  White, ----, of the _Bull_. ii. 113.

  White, Daniel, purser of the _Palsgrave_. ii. 184.

  Wickham, son of the host of Ozaka. i. 321; ii. 102.

  Wickham, Richard, of the English factory at Firando. _Passim_;
       letter, ii. 278.

  Widger, ----, of the _Thomas_. i. 218.

  Wigen a Dono, son-in-law of Iyéyasu. His death, i. 165, 166.

  Wilkyn, purser's mate of the _James Royal_. ii. 112.

  William, Dutchman. ii. 142.

  Williams, Hugh. ii. 305, 309.

  _Willing Mind_, junk. ii. 131.

  Wilmot, Edmund, purser of the _Advice_. i. 151, 153, 155, 183, 199,
    215, 218, 224, 225; ii. 17.

  Wilson, ----, master's mate of the _Thomas_. i. 223.

  Wilson, Nicholas, of the _Advice_. i. 218.

  Wilson, Ralph. i. 166, 169, 179, 180, 183, 186, 230.

  Wilson, Sir Thomas. ii. 117, 179, 205.

  Wilson, Thomas, E.I.C. i. 114, 155, 229, 230; ii. 16.

  Woamon Docka. ii. 132.

  Woman Dono. i. 328, 329; ii. 74, 104.

  Woshmado, or Utsymado. i. 158, 302.

  Wotto Dono, councillor of the Shogun. i. 170, 172.

  Wrine, James, preacher. ii. 204.

  Wyamon Dono, Will. Adams's man. ii. 129, 130, 187, 188.


  Xaxma. _See_ Satsuma.

  Ximenes, Hernando. i. 48, 114, 155, 157, 221, 233, 290; ii. 53, 55,
    65, 145, 147, 156, 216, 334.


  Yada, or Yode, Dono, of Yedo. ii. 82, 87, 252.

  Yadeo, or Yadayo, Dono, partner of Neamon Dono. i. 310; ii. 91.

  Yamanda Sinimon Dono, of Yoshida. ii. 232.

  Yarmans, capt. of the _Gallias_. ii. 59.

  Yasamon Dono, master of a junk. i. 148.

  Yasimon Dono, or Zanzabar. i. 6-244, _passim_, 333; ii. 8, 10, 23,
    27, 46, 55, 140, 148, 159, 185, 186, 204, 208, 220.

  Yasimon Dono, clerk to Gonrock Dono. ii. 113, 244.

  Yasobro. ii. 187.

  Yasozama Amanoia Dono, host at Ozaka. i. 39.

  Yasozemon Dono, of Kakegawa. ii. 232.

  Yayemon Dono, king's carpenter at Firando. i. 19, 42, 56, 113, 146;
    ii. 143, 170.

  Yayemon Dono, of Faccata, carpenter. ii. 159, 170.

  Yazemon Dono, of Faccata. ii. 115.

  Yechere, or Yechero, or Cynemon Dono. ii. 104, 105.

  Yedo. Earthquakes at, i. 167, 168, 172, 176, 193; ii. 85, 93, 235,
    242, 244, 247, 250;
       monuments and buildings, i. 169, 172; ii. 85, 87-89, 240;
       fires at, ii. 95, 96, 250;
       nobleman's house burnt, ii. 245.

  Yemia Fachman, god of war. _See_ Otongo.

  Yewkyn Dono. i. 235.

  Yezo Island. ii. 258.

  Yoichero Dono, of Kusatsu. ii. 231.

  Yoiemon Dono. ii. 170.

  Yonge, John. ii. 309.

  Yongsham, Chinaman. ii. 17.

  Yoritomo. i. 194.

  Yosemon Dono. ii. 164.

  Yoshemon Dono, of Nagasaki. ii. 133, 135, 143, 144.

  Yoshida. i. 163, 196; ii. 79, 98, 232, 255.

  Yoshiwara. ii. 80, 97, 232.

  Yoshozemon Dono. ii. 184.

  Yosio Dono, Dutch host at Miako. i. 204.

  Yoske, cook. i. 13.

  Yoskey, servant. i. 131, 152; ii. 109.

  Yosky, or Yosque, king's butler at Firando. i. 61, 135.

  Yossen, or Yoosen, John. i. 16, 17, 18, 22, 26, 28, 33, 40, 41, 87,
    154, 162, 168, 172, 180, 185, 187, 189, 190, 275, 302, 305; ii. 14,
    42, 46, 47, 50, 56, 60, 90, 91, 92, 126, 153, 167, 237, 254, 291.

  Youkaich. ii 231.

  Yoyemon, oilman. ii. 170.

  Yoyemon Dono. ii. 170.

  Yoyemon Dono, smith. ii. 170.

  Yu. i. 302; ii. 72, 228, 229.

  Yui. i. 195.


  Zamon, Pedrogo, Will. Adams's host at Miako. i. 204.

  Zazabra Dono. i. 34, 216; ii. 145, 170.

  Zewa. ii. 229.

  Zezabro Dono, of Ozaka. i. 327.

  Zeze. ii. 100.

  Zuñiga, Pedro de, friar. ii. 216, 217, 222.




                        Transcriber's Note:

The author's spelling and hyphenation of words and names is
inconsistent, e.g. Adams/Adames. Lower case Roman numerals often end
with a 'j' instead of an 'i.'

Page numbers are displayed in the right margin. Items in italics are
surrounded by underscores, _like this_. Macrons over letters are
indicated within brackets, e.g. [=o].

Footnotes were renumbered sequentially and were moved to the end of
the entry for the date (in the diary) or the piece of correspondence
(in the Appendix) in which the anchor occurs.

To accommodate display on narrow screens, where braces were used in
the book to group data horizontally across the page, the text was
formatted as indented lists instead. The entry on Febrary 13, Pg 140,
is a typical example.

Missing periods were added to ends of sentences, abbreviations, and
index entries; missing commas were added to a list entry and between
page numbers in the index. Use of italics was made consistent.

Unclear and left as printed:

  Pg 30, 'uuse'
  Pg 357, 'the 26th Julij'

Changes to text:

  Pg 23, 'is' to 'in' ...in all vj C. _tais_,...
  Pg 34, removed duplicate 'to' ... now ready to take bark ...
  Pg 34, 'tal ' to 'talk' ... had much talk about ...
  Pg 46, 'they' to 'the' ... to take the China goodes,...
  Pg 74, 'Grabstreet' to 'Grubstreet' ...our host Grubstreet ...
  Pg 113, 'removed duplicate 'an' ... 'rec. another to same effect.'...
  Pg 140, 'Hollander s' to 'Hollanders' in list
  Pg 153, 'b' added to ' ound' ... they are bound upon ...
  Pg 158, 'aud' to 'and' ... and that from hence ...
  Pg 226, removed from list duplicate 'my owne.'
  Pg 267, 'Oyen Done' to 'Oyen Dono' ... Same and Oyen Dono are ...





End of Project Gutenberg's Diary of Richard Cocks, Volume II, by Richard Cocks

